
1
With Each & Every Breath
A Guide To Meditation
anissaro Bhikkhu
(Geoﬀrey DeGraﬀ)

2
Copyright 2013 Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu
is work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Unported. To see a
copy of this license visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
“Commercial” shall mean any sale, whether for
commercial or non-prot purposes or entities.
Questions about this book may be addressed to
Metta Forest Monastery
Valley Center, CA 92082-1409
U.S.A.
Additional resources
More Dhamma talks, books and translations by
Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu are available to download in digital
audio and various ebook formats at dhammatalks.org.
Printed copy
A paperback copy of this book is available free of charge.
To request one, write to: Book Request, Metta Forest
Monastery, PO Box 1409, Valley Center, CA 92082
USA.

3
Introduction
MEDITATION: WHAT & WHY
Meditation is training for the mind, to help it develop the strengths
and skills it needs to solve its problems. Just as there are many diﬀerent
remedies for the various illnesses of the body, there are many diﬀerent
types of meditation for the various problems of the mind.
e meditation technique taught in this book is a skill aimed at
solving the mind’s most basic problem: the stress and suﬀering it brings
on itself through its own thoughts and actions. Even though the mind
wants happiness, it still manages to weigh itself down with mental pain.
In fact, that pain comes from the mind’s misguided eﬀorts to nd
happiness. Meditation helps to uncover the reasons for why the mind
does this and, in uncovering them, helps you to cure them. In curing
them, it opens you to the possibility of genuine happiness, a happiness
you can rely on, a happiness that will never change or let you down.
at’s the good news of meditation: Genuine happiness is possible,
and you can reach it through your own eﬀorts. You don’t have to content
yourself only with pleasures that will eventually leave you. You don’t have
to resign yourself to the idea that temporary happiness is the best life has
to oﬀer. And you don’t have to pin your hopes for happiness on any
person or power outside yourself. You can train the mind to access a
totally reliable happiness, a happiness that causes no harm to you or to
anyone else.
Not only is the goal of meditation good; the means for attaining that
goal are good as well. ey’re activities and mental qualities you can be
proud to develop: things like honesty, integrity, compassion, mindfulness,
and discernment. Because true happiness comes from within, it doesn’t
require that you take anything from anyone else. Your true happiness

4
doesn’t conict with the true happiness of anyone else in the world. And
when you nd true happiness inside, you have more to share with others.
is is why the practice of meditation is an act of kindness for others
as well as for yourself. When you solve the problem of stress and
suﬀering, you, of course, are the person who will most directly benet.
But you aren’t the only one. is is because when you create stress and
suﬀering for yourself, you weaken yourself. You place burdens not only
on yourself but also on the people around you: both by having to depend
on them for help and support, and also by damaging them with the
foolish things you might do or say out of weakness and fear. At the same
time, you’re hampered from helping them with their problems, for your
hands are lled with your own. But if your mind can learn how to stop
causing itself stress and suﬀering, you’re less of a burden on others and
you’re in a better position to give them a helping hand.
So the practice of meditation teaches you to respect the things within
you that are worthy of respect: your desire for a genuine happiness,
totally reliable and totally harmless; and your ability to nd that
happiness through your own eﬀorts.
To bring a total end to the mind’s self-inicted stress and suﬀering
requires a great deal of dedication, training, and skill. But the meditation
technique taught in this book doesn’t give its benets only to people who
are ready to follow it all the way to the total cure of awakening. Even if
you simply want help in managing pain or nding a little more peace and
stability in your life, meditation has plenty to oﬀer you. It can also
strengthen the mind to deal with many of the problems of day-to-day life,
because it develops qualities like mindfulness, alertness, concentration,
and discernment that are useful in all activities, at home, at work, or
wherever you are. ese qualities are also helpful in dealing with some of
the larger, more diﬃcult issues of life. Addiction, trauma, loss,
disappointment, illness, aging, and even death are a lot easier to handle
when the mind has developed the skills fostered by meditation.

5
So even if you don’t make it all the way to total freedom from stress
and suﬀering, meditation can help you to handle your suﬀerings more
skillfully—in other words, with less harm to yourself and the people
around you. is, in itself, is a worthwhile use of your time. If you then
decide to pursue the meditation further, to see if it really can lead to total
freedom, so much the better.
WHAT'S IN THIS BOOK
e meditation technique described here is drawn from two sources.
e rst source is the Buddha’s set of instructions on how to use the
breath in training the mind. ese instructions are found in the Pali
Canon, the oldest extant record of the Buddha’s teachings. As the Canon
states, the Buddha found the breath to be a restful meditation topic—
both for body and mind—as well as an ideal topic for developing
mindfulness, concentration, and discernment. In fact, it was the topic he
himself used on the path to his awakening. at’s why he recommended
it to more people and taught it in more detail than any other topic of
meditation.
e second source is a method of breath meditation developed in the
last century by Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo, a master of a branch of
Buddhism known in ailand as the Wilderness Tradition. Ajaan Lee’s
method builds on the Buddha’s instructions, explaining in detail many of
the points that the Buddha left in a condensed form. I trained in this
technique for ten years under Ajaan Fuang Jotiko, one of Ajaan Lee’s
students, so some of the insights here come from my training with Ajaan
Fuang as well.
I’ve followed these sources in focusing on the breath as the main topic
of meditation because it’s the safest of all meditation topics. e
technique described here brings the body and mind to a balanced state of
well-being. is in turn allows the mind to gain balanced insights into its
own workings, so that it can see the ways in which it’s causing stress and
suﬀering, and let them go eﬀectively.

6
is technique is part of a comprehensive path of mind training that
involves not only meditation but also the development of generosity and
virtue. e basic approach in each part of this training is the same: to
understand all your actions as part of a chain of causes and eﬀects, so that
you can direct the causes in a more positive direction. With every action
in thought, word, or deed, you reect on what you’re doing while you’re
doing it. You look for the motivation leading to your actions, and the
results your actions give rise to. As you reect, you learn to question your
actions in a specic way:
• Do they lead to stress and suﬀering, or to the end of stress and
suﬀering?
• If they lead to stress, are they necessary?
• If not, why do them again?
• If they lead to the end of stress, how can you master them as
skills?
Training in virtue and generosity asks these questions of your words
and deeds. Training in meditation approaches all events in the mind as
actions—whether they’re thoughts or emotions—and questions them in
the same way. In other words, it forces you to look at your thoughts and
emotions less in terms of their content, and more in terms of where they
come from and where they lead.
is strategy of observing your actions and probing them with these
questions is directly related to the problem it’s meant to solve: the stresses
and suﬀerings caused by your actions. at’s why it underlies the training
as a whole. Meditation simply allows you to observe your actions more
carefully, and to uncover and abandon ever more subtle levels of stress
caused by those actions. It also develops the mental qualities that
strengthen your ability to act in skillful ways.
Although the meditation technique described here is part of a
specically Buddhist training, you don’t have to be Buddhist to follow it.
It can help in overcoming problems that aren’t specic to Buddhists.

7
After all, Buddhists aren’t the only people who cause themselves stress
and suﬀering, and the qualities of mind developed through meditation
don’t have a Buddhist copyright. Mindfulness, alertness, concentration,
and discernment benet everyone who develops them. All that’s asked is
that you give these qualities a serious try.
e purpose of this book is to present the practice of meditation—
along with the larger training of which it’s a part—in a way that’s easy to
read and to put into practice. e book is divided into ve parts, each
part followed by a list of additional resources—books, articles, and audio
les—that will help you explore the issues discussed in that part in more
detail.
e rst part of the book contains instructions in the basic steps of
how to meditate. e second part gives advice on how to deal with some
of the problems that may come up as you practice. e third part deals
with issues that arise as you try to make meditation a part of your life as a
whole. e fourth part deals with issues that arise as your meditation
progresses to a higher level of skill. e fth part deals with how to
choose and relate to a meditation teacher who can give you the type of
personalized training no book can possibly provide.
HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
I’ve tried to cover most of the issues that a committed meditator will
encounter in a self-directed practice. For this reason, if you’re brand new
to meditation and are not yet ready to commit to a serious practice, you
will nd more material in this book than you’ll immediately need. Still,
you can nd plenty of useful guidance here if you read selectively. A good
approach would be to read just what’s necessary to get started meditating
and then put the book down to give it a try.
To get started:
1) Read the discussion of “Breath” in the following section, down to
the heading, “Why the breath.”

8
2) Skip to the section titled, “Focusing on the Breath” in Part One.
Read the six steps listed there until you can hold them in mind. en
nd a comfortable place to sit and try following as many of the steps as
you feel comfortable attempting. If the steps are too detailed for you,
read the article, “A Guided Meditation,” listed at the end of Part One,
or sit down and meditate while listening to any of the audio les with
the same title available on www.dhammatalks.org.
3) If you encounter problems as you get started, return to Part One
and also consult Part Two.
As for the rest of the book, you can save that till later, when you’re
ready to raise the level of your commitment.
Even then, it will be wise to read the book selectively—especially Part
ree. ere the advice is again aimed at a fully committed meditator.
Some of it may involve more commitment than you’re ready to make, so
take whatever advice seems practical in the context of your current life
and values, and leave the rest for other people—or for yourself at a later
time.
Remember, nothing in the practice of meditation is ever forced on you.
e only compulsion comes from an inner force: your own desire to be
free from self-inicted suﬀering and stress.
BASIC PREMISES
When you want to master a meditation technique, it’s good to know
the premises underlying the technique. at way you have a clear idea of
what you’re getting into. Knowing the premises also helps you
understand how and why the technique is supposed to work. If you have
doubts about the premises, you can try them on as working hypotheses,
to see if they really do help in dealing with the problems of stress and
suﬀering. Meditation doesn’t require that you swear allegiance to
anything you can’t fully understand. But it does ask you to give its
premises a serious try.

9
As your meditation progresses, you can apply the basic premises to
areas that come up in your meditation that aren’t explained in the book.
In this way, the meditation becomes less of a foreign technique, and more
of your own path in exploring the mind and solving its problems as they
arise.
Because breath meditation is a training in which the mind focuses on
the breath, its basic premises focus on two topics: the workings of the
mind, and the workings of the breath.
Mind. e word “mind” here covers not only the intellectual side of
the mind, but also its emotional side together with its will to act. In other
words, the word “mind” covers what we normally think of as “heart” as
well.
e mind is not passive. Because it’s responsible for a body with many
needs, it has to take an active approach to experience. Its actions shape its
experience as it looks for food, both mental and physical, to keep itself
and the body nourished. It’s driven by hungers both physical and mental.
We’re all familiar with the need to feed physically. Mentally, the mind
feeds both externally and internally on relationships and emotions.
Externally, it hungers for such things as love, recognition, status, power,
wealth, and praise. Internally, it feeds oﬀ its love for others and its own
self-esteem, as well as the pleasures that come from emotions both
healthy and not: honor, gratitude, greed, lust, and anger.
At any given moment, the mind is presented with a wide range of
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and ideas. From this
range, it chooses which things to focus attention on and which to ignore
in its search for food. ese choices shape the world of its experience.
is is why, if you and I walk through a store at the same time, for
example, we will experience diﬀerent stores to the extent that we’re
looking for diﬀerent things.
e mind’s search for nourishment is constant and never-ending,
because its food—especially its mental food—is always threatening to
run out. Whatever satisfaction it derives from its food is always short-

10
lived. No sooner has the mind found a place to feed than it’s already
looking for where to feed next. Should it stay here? Should it go
somewhere else? ese incessant questions of “What next?” “Where
next?” drive its search for well-being. But because these questions are the
questions of hunger, they themselves keep eating away at the mind. Driven
by hunger to keep answering these questions, the mind often acts
compulsively—sometimes willfully—out of ignorance, misunderstanding
what causes unnecessary stress and what doesn’t. is causes it to create
even more suﬀering and stress.
e purpose of meditation is to end this ignorance, and to root out
the questions of hunger that keep driving it.
An important aspect of this ignorance is the mind’s blindness to its
own inner workings in the present moment, for the present moment is
where choices are made. Although the mind often acts under the force of
habit, it doesn’t have to. It has the option of making new choices with
every moment. e more clearly you see what’s happening in the present,
the more likely you are to make skillful choices: ones that will lead to
genuine happiness—and, with practice, will bring you closer and closer
to total freedom from suﬀering and stress—now and into the future.
Meditation focuses your attention on the present moment because the
present moment is where you can watch the workings of the mind and
direct them in a more skillful direction. e present is the only moment
in time where you can act and bring about change.
e committee of the mind. One of the rst things you learn about
the mind as you get started in meditation is that it has many minds. is
is because you have many diﬀerent ideas about how to satisfy your
hungers and nd well-being, and many diﬀerent desires based on those
ideas. ese ideas boil down to diﬀerent notions about what constitutes
happiness, where it can be found, and what you are as a person: your
needs for particular kinds of pleasure, and your abilities to provide those
pleasures. Each desire thus acts as a seed for a particular sense of who
you are and the world you live in.

11
e Buddha had a technical term for this sense of self-identity in a
particular world of experience: He called it becoming. Take note of this
term and the concept behind it, for it’s central to understanding why you
cause yourself stress and suﬀering and what’s involved in learning how to
stop.
If the concept seems foreign to you, think of when you’re drifting oﬀ
to sleep and an image of a place appears in the mind. You enter into the
image, lose touch with the world outside, and that’s when you’ve entered
the world of a dream. at world of a dream, plus your sense of having
entered into it, is a form of becoming.
Once you become sensitive to this process, you’ll see that you engage
in it even when you’re awake, and many times in the course of a day. To
gain freedom from the stress and suﬀering it can cause, you’re going to
have to examine the many becomings you create in your search for food
—the selves spawned by your desires, and the worlds they inhabit—for
only when you’ve examined these things thoroughly can you gain release
from their limitations.
You’ll nd that, in some cases, diﬀerent desires share common ideas of
what happiness is and who you are (such as your desires for establishing
a safe and stable family). In others, their ideas conict (as when your
desires for your family conict with your desires for immediate pleasure
regardless of the consequences). Some of your desires relate to the same
mental worlds; others to conicting mental worlds; and still others to
mental worlds totally divorced from one another. e same goes for the
diﬀerent senses of “you” inhabiting each of those worlds. Some of your
“yous” are in harmony, others are incompatible, and still others are totally
unrelated to one another.
So there are many diﬀerent ideas of “you” in your mind, each with its
own agenda. Each of these “yous” is a member of the committee of the
mind. is is why the mind is less like a single mind and more like an
unruly throng of people: lots of diﬀerent voices, with lots of diﬀerent
opinions about what you should do.

12
Some members of the committee are open and honest about the
assumptions underlying their central desires. Others are more obscure
and devious. is is because each committee member is like a politician,
with its own supporters and strategies for satisfying their desires. Some
committee members are idealistic and honorable. Others are not. So the
mind’s committee is less like a communion of saints planning a charity
event, and more like a corrupt city council, with the balance of power
constantly shifting between diﬀerent factions, and many deals being
made in back rooms.
One of the purposes of meditation is to bring these dealings out into
the open, so that you can bring more order to the committee—so that
your desires for happiness work less at cross purposes, and more in
harmony as you realize that they don’t always have to be in conict.
inking of these desires as a committee also helps you realize that when
the practice of meditation goes against some of your desires, it doesn’t go
against all of your desires. You’re not being starved. You don’t have to
identify with the desires being thwarted through meditation, because you
have other, more skillful desires to identify with. e choice is yours. You
can also use the more skillful members of the committee to train the less
skillful ones so that they stop sabotaging your eﬀorts to nd a genuine
happiness.
Always remember that genuine happiness is possible, and the mind can
train itself to nd that happiness. ese are probably the most important
premises underlying the practice of breath meditation. ere are many
dimensions to the mind, dimensions often obscured by the squabbling of
the committee members and their xation with eeting forms of
happiness. One of those dimensions is totally unconditioned. In other
words, it’s not dependent on conditions at all. It’s not aﬀected by space or
time. It’s an experience of total, unalloyed freedom and happiness. is is
because it’s free from hunger and from the need to feed.
But even though this dimension is unconditioned, it can be attained
by changing the conditions in the mind: developing the skillful members

13
of the committee so that your choices become more and more conducive
to genuine happiness.
is is why the path of meditation is called a path: It’s like the path to
a mountain. Even though the path doesn’t cause the mountain, and your
walking on the path doesn’t cause the mountain, the act of walking along
the path can take you to the mountain.
Or you can think of the unconditioned dimension as like the fresh
water in salt water. e ordinary mind is like salt water, which makes you
sick when you drink it. If you simply let the salt water sit still, the fresh
water won’t separate out on its own. You have to make an eﬀort to distill
it. e act of distilling doesn’t create fresh water. It simply brings out the
fresh water already there, providing you with all the nourishment you
need to quench your thirst.
Training the mind. e training that gets you to the mountain and
provides you with fresh water has three aspects: virtue, concentration,
and discernment. Virtue is the skill with which you interact with other
people and living beings at large, based on the intention to cause no harm
to yourself or to others. is is a topic that we will consider in Part
ree, in the discussion of issues that commonly arise when integrating
meditation into daily life, but it’s important to note here why virtue is
related to meditation. If you act in harmful ways, then when you sit down
to meditate, the knowledge of that harm gets in the way of staying rmly
in the present moment. If you react with regret over the harm you’ve
done, you nd it diﬃcult to stay settled in the present moment with
condence. If you react with denial, you build inner walls in your
awareness that create more opportunities for ignorance and make it
harder to look directly at what’s really going on in the mind.
e best way to avoid these two reactions is to stick to the intention
not to do anything harmful in the rst place, and then make up your
mind to follow that intention with more and more skill. If you’ve seen
that you have acted unskillfully, acknowledge your mistake, recognize
that regret won’t erase the mistake, and resolve not to repeat that mistake

14
in the future. is is the most that can be asked of a human being living
in time, where our actions aimed at shaping the future can be based only
on knowledge of the past and present.
e second aspect of the training is concentration. Concentration is
the skill of keeping the mind centered on a single object, such as the
breath, with a sense of ease, refreshment, and equanimity—equanimity
being the ability to watch things without falling under the sway of likes
and dislikes.
Attaining concentration requires developing three qualities of mind:
• Alertness—the ability to know what’s happening in the body and
mind while it’s happening.
• Ardency—the desire and eﬀort to abandon any unskillful qualities
that may arise in the mind, and to develop skillful qualities in their
place.
• Mindfulness—the ability to keep something in mind. In the case
of breath meditation, this means remembering to stay with the breath
and to maintain the qualities of alertness and ardency with every in-
and-out breath.
When these three qualities become strong, they can bring the mind to
a state of strong concentration called jhana, or meditative absorption,
which we will discuss in Part Four. Because jhana is based on desire—the
desire to develop skillful qualities in the mind—it, too, is a form of
becoming. But it’s a special form of becoming that allows you to see the
processes of becoming in action. At the same time, the ease and
refreshment provided by jhana are health food for the mind, enabling you
to abandon many of the unskillful eating habits that would pull you oﬀ
the path. Because the supply of mental food coming from jhana is steady,
it takes some of the pressure oﬀ of your need to feed. is allows you to
step back from the questions of hunger, and to look at them through the
questions of discernment: seeing where the stress of feeding is unnecessary,

15
and how you can master the skills to go beyond it. is is why jhana is
central to the path of training.
e third aspect of the training is discernment. Discernment is the
ability:
• to distinguish the skillful processes in the mind from the
unskillful ones,
• to understand how to abandon what’s unskillful and to develop
what’s skillful, and
• to know how to motivate yourself so that you can abandon
unskillful processes and to develop skillful processes even when you’re
not in the mood.
You learn these three abilities by listening to others—as when you
read a book like this one—and by observing your own actions and asking
the right questions about them. In the beginning, you step back from the
questions of hunger—which demand an answer right now as to where
and what to feed on next—and take stock of how you’ve been feeding:
In what ways do your feeding habits lead to stress?
In what ways is that stress unnecessary?
To what extent is it worth it—in other words, to what extent does
the pleasure gained from feeding compensate for the stress?
In the beginning stages, as you develop virtue and try to master
concentration, the questions of discernment are simply looking for better
ways to feed. In other words, they’re rened versions of the questions of
hunger. You come to realize that the pleasure you gained from carelessly
acting in harmful ways or letting the mind wander where it will isn’t
worth the stress it entails. You begin to see where the stress you thought
was unavoidable isn’t really necessary. You have other, better ways of
nding inner nourishment, feeding on the higher pleasures that virtue
and concentration provide.

16
As your concentration develops, your discernment into the levels of
stress in the mind gets more and more rened, so that your sense of what
is and isn’t skillful gets more rened as well. As you keep applying the
questions of discernment even to your practice of jhana, you begin to
wonder if it might be possible to escape the stress that comes even with
the most rened sort of feeding. What sort of skill would that involve?
is is where the questions of discernment are no longer just a rened
version of the questions of hunger. ey become noble questions in that
they take you beyond the need to feed. ey bring dignity to your search
for happiness. ey help you uncover the dimension where even feeding
on jhana is no longer necessary. And when that dimension is nally
uncovered, all stress comes to an end.
e questions of noble discernment—concerning unnecessary stress,
the actions that cause it, and the actions that can help put an end to it—
are related to one of the Buddha’s most famous teachings: the four noble
truths. e fact of unnecessary stress is the rst truth; the unskillful
mental actions that cause it are the second; the fact that it can come to an
end is the third; and the skillful actions that bring it to an end are the
fourth.
ese truths are noble for three reasons. One, they’re absolute. ey’re
true for everyone everywhere, so they’re not just a matter of personal
opinion or your cultural background.
Two, they provide guidance for a noble path of practice. ey teach
you not to deny or run away from the stress you’re causing, but to
acknowledge it and face it until you comprehend it. When you
comprehend it, you can see the causes of that stress in your actions and
abandon them. You develop the skillful actions that put an end to stress
so that you can realize freedom from stress for yourself.
e third reason these truths are noble is that, when you use the
questions underlying them to examine and question your actions, they
lead ultimately to a noble attainment: a genuine happiness that puts an
end to the need to feed, and so causes no harm to anyone at all.

17
Because discernment is aimed at bringing your actions to the highest
level of skill, it grows directly out of the quality of ardency in your
concentration. However, it also builds on alertness in seeing which actions
lead to which results. And it informs mindfulness, so that you can
remember the lessons you’ve learned from what you’ve observed and can
apply them in the future.
In fact, all three aspects of the training—virtue, concentration, and
discernment—help one another along. Virtue makes it easier to settle
down in concentration and to be honest with yourself in discerning
which members of the mind’s committee are skillful and which ones are
not. Concentration provides the mind with a sense of refreshment that
allows it to resist unskillful urges that would create lapses in virtue, and
the stability it needs to discern clearly what’s actually going on inside.
Discernment provides strategies for developing virtue, along with an
understanding of the mind’s workings that allow it to settle down in ever-
stronger states of concentration.
Virtue, concentration, and discernment, in turn, are all based on the
most fundamental part of the training: the practice of generosity. In being
generous with your belongings, your time, your energy, your knowledge,
and your forgiveness, you create a space of freedom in the mind. Instead
of being driven by your various appetites, you can step back and realize
the joy that comes when you’re not a slave to hunger all the time. is
realization provides your basic impetus to look for a happiness where you
don’t need to feed at all. Seeing the good that comes from giving, you can
learn to approach the practice of virtue and meditation not just with an
eye to what you can get out of it, but also with an eye to what you can
give to the practice. e training of the mind becomes a gift both for
yourself and for the people around you.
So, all in all, the premises of breath meditation are based on four
observations about the mind that the Buddha called noble truths:
1) e mind experiences stress and suﬀering.

18
2) e stress and suﬀering come from the way the mind shapes its
experience through its actions driven by ignorance.
3) at ignorance can be ended, opening your awareness to an
unconditioned dimension free of stress and suﬀering.
4) at dimension, even though it’s unconditioned, can be reached by
training the mind in the skillful qualities of virtue, concentration, and
discernment.
e purpose of breath meditation is to help with that training.
Breath. e word “breath” covers a wide range of energies in the body.
Most prominently, there’s the energy of the in-and-out breath. We tend
to think of this breath as the air coming in and out of the lungs, but this
air wouldn’t move if it weren’t for an energy in the body activating the
muscles that draw it in and allow it to go out. When you meditate on the
in-and-out breath, you may start by paying attention to the movement of
the air, but as your sensitivity develops, you become more focused on the
energy.
In addition to the energy of the in-and-out breath, there are subtler
ows of energy that spread through all parts of the body. ese can be
experienced as the mind grows more still. ere are two types: moving
energies; and still, steady energies. e moving energies are directly
related to the energy of the in-and-out breath. For instance, there is the
ow of energy in the nerves, as all the muscles involved in breathing,
however subtly, are activated with each breath. is energy ow also
allows you to have sensation in the diﬀerent parts of the body and to
move them at will. ere is also the ow of energy that nourishes the
heart with each breath, and then spreads from the heart as it pumps the
blood. is can be felt with the movement of blood through the blood
vessels and out to every pore of the skin.
As for the still, steady energies, these are centered in diﬀerent spots in
the body, such as the tip of the breastbone, the middle of the brain, the
palms of the hands, or the soles of the feet. Once the in-and-out breath

19
grows calm, these energies can be spread to ll the whole body with a
sense of stillness and fullness that feels solid and secure.
To some people, these energies in the diﬀerent parts of the body might
seem mysterious—or even imaginary. But even if the concept of these
energies seems foreign to you, the energies themselves are not. ey form
the way you directly experience the body from within. If they weren’t
already there, you wouldn’t have any sense of where your own body is.
So when you try to acquaint yourself with these energies, there are
three points to keep in mind:
1) You’re not concerned with your breath as it might be observed by a
doctor or a machine outside you. You’re concerned with your breath as
only you can know it: as part of your direct experience of having a
body. If you have trouble thinking of these energies as “breath,” see if
thinking of them as “breathing sensations” or “body sensations” helps
—whatever enables you to get in touch with what’s actually there.
2) is is NOT a matter of trying to create sensations that don’t
already exist. You’re simply making yourself more sensitive to
sensations that are already there. When you’re told to let the breath
energies ow into one another, ask yourself if the sensations you feel
seem unconnected to one another. If they do, simply hold in mind the
possibility that they can connect on their own. is is what it means
to allow them to ow.
3) ese energies are not air. ey’re energy. If, while you’re allowing
the breath energies to spread through the various parts of the body,
you sense that you’re trying to force energy into those parts, stop and
remind yourself: Energy doesn’t need to be forced. ere’s plenty of
space even in the most solid parts of the body for this energy to ow,
so you don’t have to push it against any resistance. If there’s a sense of
resistance to the energy, it’s coming from the way you visualize it. Try
to visualize the energy in a way that can slip around and through
everything with ease.

20
e best way to get in touch with these energies is to close your eyes,
notice the sensations that tell you where the diﬀerent parts of your body
are, and then allow yourself to view those sensations as a type of energy.
As you get more sensitive to those sensations and see how they interact
with the energy of the in-and-out breath, it will seem more and more
natural to regard them as types of breath energy. at allows you to get
the most use out of them.
Why the breath. ere are two reasons why the breath is chosen as a
topic of meditation: It’s a good theme for developing the qualities needed
for (1) concentration and (2) discernment.
1) All three qualities needed for concentration are easily developed by
focusing on the breath:
Alertness: e only breath you can observe is the breath in the present.
When you’re with the breath, your attention has to be in the present.
Only in the present can you observe what’s going on in the body and
mind as it’s actually happening.
e breath is also a meditation theme that goes along with you
wherever you go. As long as you’re alive, you’ve got the breath right here
to focus on. is means that you can meditate on the breath and develop
alertness at any time and in any situation.
Mindfulness: Because the breath is so close to your present awareness,
it’s easy to remember. If you forget to stay with the breath, the simple
sensation of an in-breath can remind you to come back to it.
Ardency: e breath is one of the few processes in the body over which
you can exert conscious control. An important part of breath meditation
is learning how to make skillful use of this fact. You can learn which ways
of breathing foster pleasant sensations in the body, and which ones foster
unpleasant ones. You learn a sense of time and place: when and how to
change the breath to make it more comfortable, and when to leave it
alone. As you develop this knowledge, you can use it as an aid in
developing skillful qualities of mind.

21
is sort of knowledge comes from experimenting with the breath and
learning to observe the eﬀects of diﬀerent kinds of breathing on the body
and mind. You can call this sort of experimentation working with the
breath, for you’ve got an ardent purpose: the training of the mind. But
you can also call it playing with the breath, for it requires that you use
your imagination and ingenuity in thinking of diﬀerent ways to breathe
and to picture the breath energy to yourself. At the same time, it can be a
lot of fun as you learn to explore and discover things about your body on
your own.
ere are many ways in which working and playing with the breath
can help foster the quality of ardency in your meditation. For instance,
when you learn how to breathe in ways that feel comfortable—to
energize the body when you feel tired, or to relax the body when you feel
tense—you make it easier to settle into the present moment and to stay
there with a sense of well-being. You learn to view the meditation not as a
chore, but as an opportunity to develop an immediate sense of well-
being. is gives energy to your desire to stick with the meditation over
the long term.
Playing with the breath also helps you stay in the present—and stick
with the meditation over time—because it gives you something
interesting and engaging to do that can show immediate benets. is
keeps you from getting bored with the meditation. As you see the good
results arising from adjusting the breath, you become more motivated to
explore the potentials of the breath in a wide variety of diﬀerent
situations: how to adjust the breath when you’re sick, how to adjust it
when you feel physically or emotionally threatened, how to adjust it
when you need to tap into reserves of energy to overcome feelings of
exhaustion.
e pleasure and refreshment that can come from working and
playing with the breath provide your ardency with a source of inner food.
is inner food helps you deal with the obstreperous members of the
committee of the mind who won’t back down unless they get immediate

22
gratication. You learn that simply breathing in a particular way gives rise
to an immediate sense of pleasure. You can relax patterns of tension in
diﬀerent parts of the body—the back of the hands, the feet, in your
stomach or chest—that would otherwise trigger and feed unskillful
urges. is alleviates the sense of inner hunger that can drive you to do
things that you know aren’t skillful. So in addition to helping with your
ardency, this way of working with the breath can help with your practice
of virtue.
2) Because of the direct connection between ardency and discernment,
the act of working and playing with the breath also helps develop
discernment.
• e breath is the perfect place from which to watch the mind, for it’s the
physical process most responsive to the mind’s own workings. As you grow
more sensitive to the breath, you’ll come to see that subtle changes in the
breath are often a sign of subtle changes in the mind. is can alert you
to developments in the mind just as they’re starting to happen. And that
can help you to see more quickly through the ignorance that can lead to
stress and suﬀering.
• e sense of well-being fostered by working and playing with the breath
gives you a solid foundation for observing stress and suﬀering. If you feel
threatened by your suﬀering, you won’t have the patience and endurance
needed to watch and comprehend it. As soon as you encounter it, you
want to run away. But if you’re dwelling in a sense of well-being in the
body and mind, you don’t feel so threatened by pain or suﬀering. at
enables you to watch pain and suﬀering more steadily. You know that you
have a safe place in your body where the breath feels comfortable, where
you can focus your attention when the stress or suﬀering becomes too
overwhelming. (For more on this topic, see the discussion of “Pain” in
Part ree.) is gives you condence to probe more deeply into the
pain.
• e sense of pleasure that comes from concentration, as it gets more
rened, allows you to see more subtle levels of stress in the mind. It’s like

23
making yourself very quiet so that you can hear subtle sounds very far
away.
• Being able to attain this inner level of pleasure puts the mind in a much
better mood, so that it’s much more willing to accept the fact that it has
been causing itself suﬀering. Training the mind to look honestly at its
unskillful qualities is like talking to a person about his faults and
shortcomings. If he’s hungry, tired, and grumpy, he won’t want to hear
anything of what you have to say. You need to wait until he’s well-fed and
well-rested. at’s when he’ll be more willing to admit his faults.
is is the main issue with the mind: It’s causing itself suﬀering
through its own stupidity, its own lack of skill, and usually it doesn’t want
to admit this fact to itself. So we use the sense of well-being that comes
with playing and working with the breath to put the mind in a mood
where it’s much more willing to admit its shortcomings and to do
something about them.
• As you work and play with the breath, you also nd that you have
strategies for dealing with pain. Sometimes allowing breath energy to ow
right through the pain can help lessen it. At the very least, the pain
becomes less of a burden on the mind. is, too, allows you to face the
pain with condence. You’re less and less likely to feel overwhelmed by it.
• Finally, working with the breath in this way shows you the extent to
which you shape your present experience—and how you can learn to shape
it more skillfully. As I said above, the mind is primarily active in its
approach to experience. Discernment, too, has to be active in
understanding where the processes of the mind are skillful and unskillful
in the shape they give to things. Discernment doesn’t come just from
watching passively as things arise and pass away in your experience. It
also has to see why they arise and why they pass away. To do this, it has to
experiment—trying to make skillful qualities arise and unskillful
qualities pass away—to see which causes are connected to which eﬀects.
In particular, discernment comes from engaging with your present
intentions, to see the extent to which those intentions play a role in

24
shaping the way experiences arise and pass away.
e Buddhist term for this act of shaping is fabrication—in the sense
of fabricating a strategy—and fabrication comes in three forms.
— First is bodily fabrication: the fabrication of your sense of the
body through the in-and-out breath. e way you breathe inuences
your heart rate, the release of hormones into the blood stream, and the
way you experience the body in general.
— Second, there’s verbal fabrication. is is the way you direct your
thoughts to something and evaluate it. ese two processes of directed
thought and evaluation are the basis of your internal conversation. You
bring up topics in the mind to think about, and then make comments
on them.
— ird, there’s mental fabrication. is consists of perceptions and
feelings. Perceptions are the labels you put on things: the words by
which you name them, or the images the mind associates with them,
sending itself subliminal messages about them. Feelings are the
feeling-tones of pleasure, pain, or neither-pleasure-nor-pain, which
can be either physical or mental.
ese three forms of fabrication shape your every experience. Take an
example: Your boss has called you into her oﬃce for a meeting. As you go
to the meeting, you call to mind some of the diﬃcult exchanges you’ve
had with her in the past. is is perception, a form of mental fabrication.
You think about the possible issues that might be discussed, and you’re
concerned that she’s going to reprimand you. is is verbal fabrication.
As a result of your concerns, your breathing becomes constricted, causing
your heart to speed up. is is bodily fabrication. All these forms of
fabrication lead to feelings of mental and physical dis-ease, which are
another form of mental fabrication. As you open the door to her oﬃce,
these forms of fabrication already have you primed to overreact to even
the slightest expressions of dislike or contempt in her words and bodily
language—or to see such expressions even when they’re not there.

25
is is an example in which these three forms of fabrication have you
primed to enter into the meeting in a way that will aﬀect not only your
experience of the meeting, but also your boss’s experience of you. Even
before the meeting has started, you’re increasing the chances that it won’t
go well.
But you could also use the power of fabrication to shift the meeting in
another direction. Before opening the door, you stop to take a few deep,
relaxing breaths (bodily fabrication plus feeling as a mental fabrication),
and then call to mind the fact that your boss has been suﬀering from a lot
of stress lately (perception as a mental fabrication). Putting yourself in
her shoes, you think of ways in which to approach the meeting in a spirit
of cooperation (verbal fabrication). You open the door to a diﬀerent
meeting.
ese three forms of fabrication shape not only your external
experiences. ey’re also—and primarily—the processes shaping the
diﬀerent members of the mind’s committee, as well as the means by
which the diﬀerent committee members interact. Verbal fabrications are
the most obvious way in which these members shout or whisper in one
another’s ears—your many inner ears—but verbal fabrications are not
the only way. For instance, if one of the members is advocating anger, it
will also hijack your breathing, making it labored and uncomfortable.
is leads you to believe that you’ve got to get the uncomfortable feeling
associated with the anger out of your system by saying or doing
something under its inuence. Anger will also ash perceptions and
images of danger and injustice through your mind, in the same way that
devious television producers might ash subliminal messages on your
television screen to make you hate and fear the people they don’t like.
It’s because we’re ignorant of the many levels on which these
fabrications shape our actions that we suﬀer from stress. To end that
suﬀering, we have to bring these fabrications into the light of our
alertness and discernment.

26
Working and playing with the breath is an ideal way to do this,
because when you work with the breath, you bring all three kinds of
fabrication together. You’re adjusting and observing the breath; you’re
thinking about the breath and evaluating the breath; you use the
perceptions of the breath to stay with the breath, and you evaluate the
feelings that arise when you work with the breath.
is allows you to be more sensitive to the fabrication of what’s going
on in the present. You begin to see how the mind’s committee creates
pleasure and pain not only while engaged in meditation, but all of the
time. By consciously engaging in this fabrication with knowledge and
discernment, you can change the balance of power in the mind. You
reclaim your breath, your thoughts, your perceptions and feelings so that
they can strengthen the skillful members of the committee, and aren’t
under the power of the unskillful ones. You can actually create new, even
more skillful members of the committee, who help you progress on the
path.
In this way, you take one of the problems of the mind—its
fragmentation into many diﬀerent voices, many diﬀerent selves—and
turn it to your advantage. As you develop new skills in meditation, you
train new members of the committee who can reason with and convert
the more impatient members, showing them how to cooperate in nding
a true happiness. As for the members that can’t be converted, they
gradually lose their power because their promises of happiness are no
match for the promises of the new members who actually deliver. So the
blatantly unskillful members gradually disappear.
As your practice of concentration and discernment develops, you
become more sensitive to the stresses and suﬀerings caused by fabrication
even in activities that you used to regard as pleasant. is makes you
become more ardent in looking for a way out. And when discernment
sees that the way you fabricate stress and suﬀering in the present moment
is unnecessary, you lose your taste for those fabrications and can let them
stop. at’s how the mind becomes free.

27
In the beginning, you gain this freedom step by step, starting from the
most blatant levels of fabrication. As the meditation develops,
discernment frees you from progressively subtler levels until it can drop
the subtlest levels that stand in the way of the unfabricated dimension:
the unconditioned dimension that constitutes the ultimate happiness.
Your rst taste of this dimension shows you that the most important
premise underlying breath meditation is right: An unconditioned
happiness is possible. Even though, at this stage, your taste of this
dimension doesn’t totally put an end to suﬀering and stress, it does
conrm that you’re on the right path. You’ll be able to reach it for sure.
And at that point, you’ll have no more need for books of this sort.
Because the breath is so helpful in developing all three aspects of the
path to unconditioned happiness—virtue, concentration, and
discernment—it’s an ideal theme for training the mind to experience that
happiness for itself.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
(In every case where no author is listed, the writings are mine.)
On the values underlying the practice: “Aﬃrming the Truths of the
Heart” and “Karma” in Noble Strategy; “Generosity First” in Meditations;
“Purity of Heart” in Purity of Heart
On the committee of the mind: Selves & Not-self; “e Wisdom of the
Ego” in Head & Heart Together
On the suﬀering that the mind creates for itself: “Life Isn’t Just
Suﬀering” in e Karma of Questions; “Ignorance” in Head & Heart
Together
On the questions of discernment: “Questions of Skill” in e Karma
of Questions
On the four noble truths: “Untangling the Present” in Purity of Heart.
For a more detailed discussion, see the sections, “e Four Noble
Truths” and “e First Truth” in e Wings to Awakening.

28
On the role of moderation and discernment in the practice: “e
Middles of the Middle Way” in Beyond All Directions
On the meaning of mindfulness: “Mindfulness Dened” in Head &
Heart Together; “e Agendas of Mindfulness” in e Karma of Questions
On the element of play in the practice: “e Joy of Eﬀort” in Head &
Heart Together; “Joy in Eﬀort” in Meditations5
It’s often nice to have a few books of short Dhamma passages that you
can open at random to get a Buddhist perspective on things. Some good
examples: Ajaan Fuang Jotiko – Awareness Itself; Ajaan Lee
Dhammadharo – e Skill of Release; Ajaan Dune Atulo – Gifts He Left
Behind; Ajahn Chah Subhaddo – In Simple Terms; and the section, “Pure
& Simple” in Upasika Kee Nanayon – An Unentangled Knowing
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):
2007/6/6: e Noble Search for Happiness   (read)
2011/10/17: Why We Train the Mind   (read)
2011/12/22: Countercultural Values   (read)
2012/4/4: e Intelligent Heart   (read)
2012/6/20: Homeschooling Your Inner Children   (read)
2005/3/7: e Open Committee   (read)
2011/2/6: Organizing Your Inner Committee   (read)
2006/1/13: Unskillful Voices   (read)
2005/5/21: e Karma of Self & Not-self   (read)
2005/04/12: e Need for Stillness   (read)
2005/3/27: Everybody Suﬀers   (read)
2004/1/9: Why the Breath   (read)
2010/8/13: Why Mindfulness   (read)
2009/7/23: Concentration Nurtured with Virtue   (read)
2001/5: Concentration & Insight   (read)

29
PA R T  O N E
Basic Instructions
I : GETTING READY TO MEDITATE
Meditation is something you can do in any situation and in any
posture. However, some situations are more conducive than others to
helping the mind settle down. Especially when you’re just getting started,
it’s wise to look for situations where there’s a minimum of disturbance,
both physical and mental.
Also, some postures are more conducive than others to helping the
mind settle down. e standard posture for meditation is sitting, and it’s
wise to learn how to sit in a way that allows you to meditate for long
periods of time without moving and without at the same time causing
undue pain or harm for the body. Other standard postures for meditating
are walking, standing, and lying down. We’ll focus here on sitting, and
save the other postures for section IV of Part One, below.
Before you sit to meditate on the breath, it’s wise to look at three
things in this order: your physical situation, your posture, and your
mental situation—in other words, the state of your mind.
Your Physical Situation
Where to meditate. Choose a quiet spot, in your home or outside.
For a daily meditation routine, it’s good to choose a spot that you don’t
normally use for other purposes. Tell yourself that the only thing you’re
going to do when you sit in that spot is to meditate. You’ll begin to
develop quiet associations with that spot each time you sit there. It
becomes your special place to settle down and be still. To make it even
more calming, try to keep the area around it neat and clean.
When to meditate. Choose a good time to meditate. Early in the
morning, right after you’ve woken up and washed your face, is often best,

30
for your body is rested and your mind hasn’t yet become cluttered with
issues from the day. Another good time is in the evening, after you’ve
rested a bit from your daily work. Right before you go to sleep is not the
best time to meditate, for the mind will keep telling itself, “As soon as this
is over, I’m going to bed.” You’ll start associating meditation with sleep,
and, as the ais say, your head will start looking for the pillow as soon
as you close your eyes.
If you have trouble sleeping, then by all means meditate when you’re
lying in bed, for meditation is a useful substitute for sleep. Often it can be
more refreshing than sleep, for it can dissolve bodily and mental tensions
better than sleeping can. It can also calm you down enough so that
worries don’t sap your energy or keep you awake. But make sure that you
also set aside another time of the day to meditate too, so that you don’t
always associate meditation with sleep. You want to develop it as an
exercise in staying alert.
Also, it’s generally not wise to schedule your regular meditation for
right after a large meal. Your body will be directing the blood down to
your digestive system, and that will tend to make you drowsy.
Minimizing disturbance. If you’re living with other people, tell them
you don’t want to be disturbed while you’re meditating unless there’s a
serious emergency. You’re taking some time out to be an easier person to
live with. If you’re the only adult at home, and you’re living with children
for whom everything is a serious emergency, choose a time when the
children are asleep. If you’re living with older children, explain to them
that you’ll be meditating for x amount of time and you need privacy
during that time. If they interrupt you with a non-emergency, quietly tell
them that you’re still meditating and that you’ll talk with them when
you’re done. If they want to meditate with you, welcome them, but
establish a few rules for their behavior so that they don’t disturb your
time to be quiet.
Turn oﬀ your cell phone and any other devices that might interrupt
your meditation.

31
Use a watch or a clock with a timer to time your meditation. In the
beginning, twenty minutes is usually about right, for it gives you enough
time to settle down a bit, but not so much time that you start getting
bored or frustrated if things aren’t going well. As you gain some skill in
the meditation, you can gradually increase your meditation time by ve-
or ten-minute increments.
Once you’ve set your timer, put it behind you or oﬀ to your side so
that you can’t see it while you’re in your meditation position. at will
help you to avoid the temptation to peek at the time and to turn your
meditation into an exercise in clock-watching.
If you have a dog in your home, put it in another room and close the
door. If it starts to whine and scratch at the door, let it into the room
where you’re sitting, but be strict with yourself in being unresponsive if it
comes to you for attention. Most dogs, after a few days, will get the
message that when you’re sitting there with your eyes closed, you’re not
going to respond. e dog may well lie down and rest along with you.
But if it doesn’t get the message, put it back in the other room.
Cats are usually less of a problem in this regard, but if you do have an
attention-starved cat, treat it as you would a dog.
Your Posture
An important part of training the mind lies in training the body to
stay still so that you can focus on the movements of the mind without
being disturbed by the movement of the body. If you’re not used to sitting
still for long periods of time, the act of training the body will have to go
along with training the mind.
If you’re new to meditation, it’s wise not to focus too much on your
posture for the rst several sessions. at way you can give your full
attention to training the mind, saving the process of training the body for
when you’ve had some success in focusing on the breath.
So for beginners, simply sit in a comfortable way, spread thoughts of
goodwill—a wish for true happiness—to yourself and others, and then

32
follow the steps in the section, “Focusing on the Breath,” below. If your
posture gets uncomfortable, you may shift slightly to relieve the
discomfort, but try to keep your attention focused on the breath while
you shift position.
If, after a while, you feel ready to focus on your posture, here are some
things you can try:
Sitting on the oor. An ideal posture is to sit cross-legged on the
oor, with at most a folded blanket under you—placed just under your
sitting bones or under your folded legs as well.
is is a classic meditation posture for at least two good reasons:
One, it’s stable. You’re not likely to fall over even when, in the more
advanced levels of meditation, your sense of the body gets replaced by a
sense of space or pure knowing.
Two, when you’re accustomed to this posture, you can sit and
meditate anywhere. You can go out into the woods, place a small mat on
the ground, sit down, and there you are. You don’t have to carry a lot of
cushions or other paraphernalia around with you.
A standard version of the posture is this:
• Sit on the oor or your folded blanket with your left leg folded in
front of you, and your right leg folded on top of your left leg. Place
your hands on your lap, palms up, with your right hand on top of the
left. (To prevent this posture from causing an imbalance in your spine,
you can alternate sides by sometimes placing your left leg on top of
your right leg, and your left hand on top of your right hand.)
• Bring your hands close to your stomach. is will help keep your
back straight and minimize the tendency to hunch over.
• Sit straight, look straight in front of you, and close your eyes. If
closing your eyes makes you feel uncomfortable or induces feelings of
sleepiness, you can leave them half open—although if you do, don’t
look straight ahead. Lower your gaze to a spot on the oor about three

33
feet in front of you. Keep your focus soft. Be careful not to let it
harden into a stare.
• Notice if your body feels like it’s leaning to the left or the right. If
it is, relax the muscles that are pulling it in that direction, so that you
bring your spine into a reasonably straight alignment.
• Pull your shoulders back slightly and then down, to create a slight
arch in your middle and lower back. Pull your stomach in a bit, so that
the back muscles aren’t doing all the work in keeping you erect.
• Relax into this posture. In other words, see how many muscles
you can relax in your torso, hips, etc., and still stay erect. is step is
important, for it helps you to stay with the posture with a minimum
of strain.
is is called the half-lotus position, because only one leg is on top of
the other. In the full-lotus, once your right leg is on top of your left, you
bring your left leg on top of your right. is is an extremely stable
position if you can manage it, but don’t try it until you’re adept at the
half-lotus.
If you’re not accustomed to the half-lotus, you may nd in the
beginning that your legs will quickly fall asleep. at’s because blood that
normally ows in the main arteries is being pushed into the small
capillaries. is can be uncomfortable at rst, but don’t worry. You’re not
harming the body, for the body can adapt. If the small capillaries carry an
increased load of blood frequently enough, they will enlarge, and your
circulatory system will be rerouted to accommodate your new posture.
e trick with all postures is to break yourself in gradually. Pushing
yourself to sit long hours right from the start is not wise, for you can
damage your knees. If you know any good yoga teachers, ask them to
recommend some yoga poses that will help limber up your legs and hips.
Do those poses before you meditate to speed up the body’s adaptation to
the sitting posture.

34
A somewhat gentler way of sitting cross-legged than the half-lotus is
the tailor position: Fold your legs, but don’t put the right leg on top of the
left. Place it on the oor in front of the left, so that your right knee makes
a gentler angle, and the left leg isn’t pressed down by the right. is helps
relieve some of the pressure on both legs.
Benches & chairs. If you have a knee or hip injury that makes it
diﬃcult to sit cross-legged, you can try sitting on a meditation bench, to
see if that’s easier. Kneel with your shins on the ground, place the bench
over your calves, and then sit back on the bench. Some benches are
designed to force you to sit at a certain angle. Others can rock back and
forth, allowing you to choose your own angle or to change it at will.
Some people like this; others nd it unstable. It’s a personal choice.
If none of these three alternatives—sitting right on the oor, sitting on
the oor on top of a folded blanket, or sitting on a meditation bench—
works for you, there are many styles of meditation cushions available for
purchase. ey’re usually a waste of money, though, because an extra
folded blanket or rm pillow can usually serve the same purpose. Pillows
and blankets may not look as serious as a dedicated meditation cushion,
but there’s no need to pay a lot of extra money just for looks. A good
lesson in becoming a meditator is learning how to improvise with what
you’ve got.
Alternatively, you can try sitting on a chair.
Choose a chair with a seat just high enough oﬀ the ground so that
your feet can rest at on the ground and your knees can bend at a ninety-
degree angle. A wooden or other rm chair, with or without a folded
blanket or thin cushion on the seat, is ideal. Too thick a cushion is
unwise, for it leads you to hunch over.
When you’ve got a good chair, sit slightly away from the back, so that
your back supports itself. en follow the same steps as with the half-
lotus: Place your hands on your lap, palms up, one on top of the other.
Bring your hands close to your stomach. Sit straight, look straight in
front of you, and close your eyes. Pull your shoulders back slightly and

35
then down, to create a nice arch in your middle and lower back. Pull your
stomach in a bit. Relax into this posture. In other words, see how many
muscles you can relax and still maintain it.
If you’re too ill or disabled to sit in any of these postures, choose a
posture that feels comfortable for your particular condition.
With any posture, if you discover that you have a tendency over time
to slump your back, it may be because of the way you breathe out. Pay a
little extra attention to your out-breaths, reminding yourself to keep your
back straight each time you breathe out. Keep this up until you’ve
established it as a habit.
And whatever your posture, remember that you don’t have to make a
vow at the beginning not to move. If you nd yourself in extreme pain,
wait a minute so that you don’t become a slave to every passing pain, and
then very consciously—without thinking of anything else—shift your
posture to something more comfortable. en resume your meditation.
The State of Your Mind
Once your body is in position, take a couple of deep in-and-out
breaths, and then look at the state of your mind. Is it staying with the
breath, or is a persistent mood getting in the way? If you’re staying with
the breath, keep going. If some of the members of your mind’s committee
are less cooperative, bring in some other members to counteract them.
e important point is that you don’t let a mood dictate whether
you’re going to meditate or not. Remember, a bad meditation session is
better than no meditation session at all. At the very least, you learn to
resist the unskillful members of your mind to at least some extent. And
only through resisting them can you come to understand them—in the
same way that building a dam across a river is a good way to learn how
strong the river’s currents are.
If some of your committee members are getting in the way, there are
some standard contemplations to counteract them. e purpose of these
contemplations is to cut through the mind’s usual narratives and to create

36
some new committee members with new narratives that will help put
things into perspective so that you’re more willing to stay with the breath.
e sublime attitudes. e most popular contemplation is to develop
attitudes of goodwill, compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity for all
beings, without limit. ese attitudes—called brahmaviharas, or sublime
attitudes—are so useful that many people make a standard practice of
developing them for a few minutes at the beginning of every meditation
session regardless of whether there’s a conscious need for them. is
helps to clear up any buried resentments from your daily interactions
with other people, and reminds you of why you’re meditating: You want
to nd a happiness that’s secure—which means that it has to be
harmless. Meditation is one of the few ways of nding happiness that
harms no one at all. At the same time, you’re creating a new narrative for
your life: Instead of being a person weighed down by resentments, you
show yourself that you can rise above diﬃcult situations and develop a
magnanimous heart.
e four sublime attitudes are actually contained in two: goodwill and
equanimity. Goodwill is a wish for true happiness, both for yourself and
for all others. Compassion is the attitude that goodwill develops when it
sees people suﬀering or acting in ways that will lead to suﬀering. You
want them to stop suﬀering. Empathetic joy is the attitude that goodwill
develops when it sees people happy or acting in ways that will lead to
happiness. You want them to continue being happy. Equanimity is the
attitude you have to develop when you realize that certain things are
beyond your control. If you let yourself get worked up over them, you
waste the energy you could have applied to areas where you can have an
eﬀect. So you try to put your mind on an even keel toward the things you
can’t control, beyond the sway of your likes and dislikes.
Here’s an exercise for developing goodwill and equanimity:
Remind yourself of what goodwill is—a wish for true happiness—and
that, in spreading thoughts of goodwill, you’re wishing that you and all

37
others will develop the causes for true happiness. You’re also establishing
the intention to further true happiness in any way you can, within your
own mind and in your dealings with others. Of course, not everyone will
act in line with your wish, which is why it’s important also to develop
thoughts of equanimity to cover the cases where people refuse to act in
the interests of true happiness. at way you won’t suﬀer so much when
people act unskillfully, and you can stay focused on the cases where you
can be of help.
For goodwill, begin by stating in your mind a traditional expression of
goodwill for yourself: “May I be happy. May I be free from stress and pain.
May I be free from animosity, free from trouble, free from oppression. May I
look after myself with ease.”
en spread similar thoughts to others, in ever-widening circles:
people close to your heart, people you like, people you’re neutral about,
people you don’t like, people you don’t even know—and not just people:
all living beings in all directions. In each case, say to yourself, “May you be
happy. May you be free from stress and pain. May you be free from
animosity, free from trouble, free from oppression. May you look after yourself
with ease.” ink of this wish as spreading out in all directions, out to
innity. It helps to enlarge the mind.
To make this a heart-changing practice, ask yourself—when you’re
secure in your goodwill for yourself—if there’s anyone for whom you
can’t sincerely spread thoughts of goodwill. If a particular person comes
to mind, ask yourself: “What would be gained by this person’s suﬀering?”
Most of the cruelty in the world comes from people who are suﬀering
and fearful. Only rarely do people who’ve been acting unskillfully react
skillfully to their suﬀering and change their ways. All too often they do
just the opposite: ey hunger to make others suﬀer even more. So the
world would be a better place if we could all simply follow the path to
true happiness by being generous and virtuous, and by training the mind.
With these thoughts in mind, see if you can express goodwill for this
sort of person: “May you learn the error of your ways, learn the way to true

38
happiness, and look after yourself with ease.” In expressing this thought,
you’re not necessarily wishing to love or have continued relations with
this person. You’re simply making the determination not to seek revenge
against those who have acted harmfully, or those whom you have
harmed. is is a gift both to yourself and to those around you.
Conclude the session by developing an attitude of equanimity. Remind
yourself that all beings will experience happiness or sorrow in line with
their actions. In many cases, their actions lie beyond your control, and
your own past actions can’t be erased. In cases where these actions place
obstacles in the way of the happiness you wish for all beings, you simply
have to accept the fact with equanimity. at way you can focus on areas
where you can make a diﬀerence through your present actions. is is
why the traditional formula for equanimity focuses on the issue of action:
“All living beings are the owners of their actions, heir to their actions, born
of their actions, are related through their actions, and live dependent on their
actions. Whatever they do, for good or for evil, to that will they fall heir.”
inking in this way helps you not to get worked up about what you
can’t change, so that you can devote the energy of your goodwill to what
you can.
If there are people for whom goodwill is simply too diﬃcult for you to
manage right now, you might try developing thoughts of compassion
instead. ink of the ways that they may be suﬀering, to see if that
softens your attitude toward them, or helps you understand why they act
the way they do. If this is too diﬃcult, you can go straight to thoughts of
equanimity about them. In other words, you can remind yourself that
you don’t have to settle accounts. You’re better oﬀ freeing yourself from
the circle of revenge. e principle of action and its results will take care
of the situation.
Just that thought can give the mind some space to settle down and
develop some concentration.

39
By spreading thoughts of goodwill and equanimity to all beings, you
take your mind out of its everyday narratives and create a broader
perspective for your meditation. It’s easiest to settle the mind into the
present moment, right here and now, when you’ve let it think for a few
moments about the universe as a whole. When you remember that all
beings are looking for happiness—sometimes skillfully, more often not—
it puts your own quest for happiness in perspective. You want to do it
right.
ere are other contemplations to counteract specic unskillful
moods that might get in the way of your meditation, such as
contemplation of your own acts of generosity and virtue for when you’re
feeling low self-esteem, contemplation of death for when you’re lazy, or
contemplation of the unattractive parts of the body for when you’re
overcome with lust. A few of these contemplations are described in more
detail in the Appendix.
II : FOCUSING ON THE BREATH
Now you’re ready to focus on the breath. ere are six steps:
1. Find a comfortable way of breathing.
Start by taking a couple of deep, long in-and-out breaths. is helps
to energize the body for meditation and makes the breath easier to
observe. Deep breathing at the beginning of meditation is also a good
habit to maintain even as you become more skilled in the practice, for it
helps to counteract any tendency to suppress the breath as you try to
make the mind still.
Notice where you feel the sensations of breathing in the body: the
sensations that tell you, “Now you’re taking an in-breath. Now you’re
taking an out-breath.” Notice if they’re comfortable. If they are, keep
breathing in that way. If they’re not, adjust the breath so that it’s more
comfortable. You can do this in any of three ways:

40
a. As you continue breathing deep and long, notice where a sense of
strain develops in the body toward the end of the in-breath, or where
there’s a sense of squeezing the breath out toward the end of the out-
breath. Ask yourself if you can relax those sensations with the next
breath as you maintain the same breathing rhythm. In other words, can
you maintain a sense of relaxation in the areas that have been feeling
strained toward the end of the in-breath? Can you breathe out at the
same rate without squeezing it out? If you can, keep up that rhythm of
breathing.
b. Try changing the rhythm and texture of the breath. Experiment
with diﬀerent ways of breathing to see how they feel. You can make the
breath shorter or longer. You can try short in and long out, or long in and
short out. You can try faster breathing or slower breathing. Deeper or
more shallow. Heavier or lighter. Broader or more narrow. When you
nd a rhythm that feels good, stick with it as long as it feels good. If, after
a while, it doesn’t feel good, you can adjust the breath again.
c. Simply pose the question in the mind each time you breathe in:
“What kind of breath would feel especially gratifying right now?” See
how your body responds.
2. Stay with each in-and-out breath.
If your attention slips oﬀ to something else, bring it right back to the
breath. If it wanders oﬀ again, bring it back again. If it wanders oﬀ 100
times, bring it back 100 times. Don’t get discouraged. Don’t get upset
with yourself. Each time you come back, reward yourself with an
especially gratifying breath. at way the mind will develop positive
associations with the breath. You’ll nd it easier to stay with the breath,
and to return to it quickly the next time you slip oﬀ.
If you get discouraged thinking about how many breaths you’re going
to have to stay focused on, tell yourself with each breath: “Just this one
in-breath; just this one out-breath.” e task of staying with the breath

41
will then seem less overwhelming, and your thoughts will be more
precisely focused on the present.
If you want, you can use a meditation word to help fasten your
attention to the breath. Buddho (“awake”) is a popular one. ink bud
with the in-breath, and dho with the out. Or you can simply think in and
out. Keep the meditation word as long as the breath. When you nd that
you can stay easily with the breath, drop the meditation word so that you
can observe the breath more clearly.
3. When the blatant sensations of breathing are comfortable, expand your
awareness to diﬀerent parts of the body to observe more subtle breathing
sensations.
You can do this section-by-section, in any order you like, but in the
beginning try to be systematic so that you cover the entire body. Later,
when your sensitivity to the body becomes more automatic, you will
quickly sense which parts of the body need most attention, and you can
direct your attention immediately there. But when you’re starting out, it’s
good to have a clear and comprehensive roadmap in mind.
One roadmap is this:
• Start with the area around the navel. Locate that part of the body
in your awareness and watch it for a while as you breathe in and
breathe out. See what rhythm and texture of breathing feels best right
there. If you notice any sense of tension or tightness in that part of the
body, allow it to relax, so that no tension builds up as you breathe in,
and you don’t hold on to any tension as you breathe out. If you want,
you can think of breath energy entering the body right there at the
navel, so that you don’t create a sense of strain by trying to pull it there
from somewhere else. Have a sense that the breath energy is coming in
and out freely and easily. ere’s nothing obstructing it.
• When that part of the body feels refreshed, move your attention
to diﬀerent parts of the front of your torso and repeat the same steps.

42
Survey the parts in this order: the lower right-hand corner of the
abdomen, the lower left-hand corner of the abdomen; the solar plexus
(the spot right in front of your stomach), the right ank (the side of
the rib cage), the left ank; the middle of the chest, the spot to the
right of that where the chest and the shoulder meet, the same spot on
the left. In other words, you move up the front of the torso, focusing
rst on the center, then on the right, then on the left. en you move
further up the torso and repeat the same pattern.
• You may nd, as you focus on the diﬀerent parts of the body, that
the rhythm and texture of the breathing will change to suit that part of
the body. is is perfectly ne.
• en move your attention to the base of the throat and follow the
same steps as for the navel.
• en bring your attention to the middle of the head. As you
breathe in and out, think of the breath energy coming in and out not
only through the nose, but also through the eyes, the ears, the back of
the neck, the top of the head. ink of the energy gently working
through any patterns of tension you may feel in the head—in the jaws,
around the eyes, in the forehead—and very gently dissolving those
patterns of tension away. When the patterns of tension feel relaxed,
you can think of the breath energy going deep into the area around the
pineal gland, right behind the eyes, and allowing that part of the body
to absorb all the incoming breath energy it needs. But be careful not to
put too much pressure on the head, because the nerves of the head
tend to be overworked. Apply just enough pressure to maintain your
focus comfortably.
• Now move your attention to the back of the neck, right at the
base of the skull. As you breathe in, think of the breath energy
entering the body at that spot and then going down the shoulders,
down the arms, out to the tips of the ngers. As you breathe out,
think of the energy radiating out from those parts of the body into the
air. As you become more sensitive to these parts of the body, notice

43
which side is carrying more tension: the left shoulder or the right
shoulder, the left upper arm or the right upper arm, and so on.
Whichever side is holding more tension, consciously try to relax that
side and keep it relaxed all the way through the in-breath, all the way
through the out-breath.
If you tend to hold a lot of tension in your hands, spend a fair
amount of time releasing the tension along the back of each hand and
in each nger.
• Now, keeping your focus at the back of the neck, breathe in with
the thought that the energy is going down both sides of the spine
down to the tailbone. Repeat the same steps as for the shoulders and
arms. In other words, when you breathe out, think of the breath
energy radiating out from the back into the air. As you become more
sensitive to the back, notice which side is carrying more tension and
consciously try to keep that side relaxed all the way through the in-
breath, all the way through the out-breath.
• Now move your attention down to the tailbone. As you breathe
in, think of the breath energy entering the body there, going down
past the hips, down the legs, and out to the tips of the toes. Repeat the
same steps as for the shoulders and arms. If necessary, you can spend a
fair amount of time releasing the tension in your feet and toes.
• at completes one cycle in the survey of the body. If you like, you
can go through the body again, beginning at the navel, to see if you can
clear up any patterns of tension you may have missed the rst time
around. You can keep this up as many times as you like until you feel
ready to settle down.
e amount of time you spend with each section of the body is up to
you. In the beginning, as a general rule of thumb, you might want to
spend just a few minutes with each point or section, giving more time to
the points on the central meridian of the body than to the points on the
side, and even more time to the shoulders, back, and legs. As you become
more familiar with the energy patterns in your own body, you can adjust

44
the time spent on each point as you see t. If one point or section seems
to respond especially well to your attention, releasing tension in a
refreshing way, stick with that point as long as it responds. If a point or
section doesn’t respond after several minutes of attention—or if you nd
that tension increases when you focus on it—drop it for the time being
and move on to the next point.
If your time for meditation is limited, you might want to limit your
survey to the center points on the front of the torso—navel, solar plexus,
middle of the chest—and then to the base of the throat and the middle of
the head.
If focusing in the head gives you a headache, avoid focusing there until
you learn how to maintain focus with a minimum of pressure.
4. Choose a spot to settle down.
You can choose any spot you like where the breath energy is clear and
you nd it easy to stay focused. A few of the traditional spots are:
a. the tip of the nose,
b. the point between the eyebrows,
c. the middle of the forehead,
d. the top of the head,
e. the middle of the head,
f. the palate,
g. the back of the neck at the base of the skull,
h. the base of the throat,
i. the breastbone (the tip of the sternum),
j. the navel (or a point just above it),
k. the base of the spine.
Over the course of several meditations, you can experiment with
diﬀerent spots to see which ones give the best results. You may also nd
that other spots not mentioned on this list are also congenial. Or you

45
may nd that keeping track of two spots at once—say, the middle of the
head and the base of the spine—helps to keep your attention xed more
rmly than focusing just on one spot. Ultimately, you want to be able to
keep your attention focused on any spot in the body. is ability will be
useful when you’re suﬀering from a disease or injury, as you can
sometimes speed healing by focusing on the breath energy at particular
spots in the body.
5. Spread your awareness from that spot so that it lls the body through
every in-and-out breath.
ink of a lit candle in the middle of an otherwise dark room. e
ame of the candle is in one spot, but its light lls the entire room. You
want your awareness to be centered but broad in just the same way. Your
sense of awareness may have a tendency to shrink—especially as you
breathe out—so remind yourself with every breath: “whole body
breathing in, whole body breathing out.” is full-body awareness helps
to keep you from getting drowsy when the breath gets comfortable, and
from losing focus as the breath gets more subtle.
6. ink of the breath energy coursing through the whole body with every
in-and-out breath.
Let the breath nd whatever rhythm or texture feels best. ink of all
the breath energies connecting with one another and owing in harmony.
e more fully they’re connected, the more eﬀortless your breathing will
be. If you have a sense that the breath-channels are open during the in-
breath but close during the out-breath, adjust your perception to keep
them open throughout the breathing cycle.
en simply maintain that sense of whole-body breathing throughout
the remainder of your meditation. If the breath grows still, don’t worry.
e body will breathe if it needs to. When the mind is still, the brain
uses less oxygen, so the oxygen that the body receives passively—through
the lungs and perhaps through the relaxed pores (anatomists have
diﬀering opinions on this)—will be enough to serve its needs. At the

46
same time, however, don’t force the breath to stop. Let it follow its own
rhythm. Your duty is simply to maintain a broad, centered awareness and
to allow the breath to ow freely throughout the body.
If you nd that you lose focus when you spread your awareness
through the body, you can return to the survey of the diﬀerent parts, try a
meditation word, or simply stay focused on one point until you feel ready
to try full-body awareness again.
Variations. As you get more familiar with the meditation and with
the problems you encounter while doing it, you can adjust these steps as
you see t. In fact, gaining a sense of how to adjust things—to learn from
your own experimentation—is an important principle in using breath
meditation to develop discernment.
For example, you may want to change the order of the steps. You might
nd that you can more easily nd a comfortable way of breathing (step
one) if you rst develop a full-body awareness (step ve). Or you might
nd that you need to force the mind to settle down rmly in a single spot
for a while (step four) before you can explore the breath sensations in the
rest of the body (step three). You might nd that after you’ve chosen one
spot to stay settled in (step four), you want to focus on two spots at once
for a while before you move on to spreading your awareness to the whole
body (step ve).
Another way of adjusting the steps is to vary what you do within a
particular step. Step three—exploring the subtle breath sensations in the
body—allows for an especially wide range of variation. You might want
to start your survey at the back of the neck, thinking of the breath energy
entering the body there from the back and then going down through the
spine, and ultimately out the legs to the tips of the toes and the spaces
between the toes. en think of the breath coming in the back of the
neck going down through the shoulders and out through the arms to the
ngers and the spaces between the ngers. en move your attention to
the breath sensations in the front of the torso.

47
Or you might want to go through the body very quickly at rst, and
then repeat the survey more methodically.
Or you might visualize changing the direction of how the breath
sensations ow through the body. For instance, instead of thinking of the
breath owing down the spine and out the feet, you might think of it
coming up from the feet, going up the spine, and then either going out
the top of the head or over the top of the head and down through your
throat and out the area in front of the heart.
Or you might sense that there are breath energies surrounding the
body like a cocoon. When this happens, try to get a sense of how to tell
when these energies are in harmony, when they’re in conict, and how to
bring them from conict to harmony in a way that nourishes the energies
inside the body. One way of doing this is to visualize these energies as all
owing in one direction—say, from the head to the toes—and then, after
a while, visualizing them all owing in the other direction. Notice which
direction feels more comfortable, and then stick with that. If the cocoon
of breath energies feels comfortable, you can experiment with ways of
using that comfortable energy to heal parts of the body that feel tight or
in pain.
Another way of adjusting the steps, on certain occasions, is to focus on
only a few of the steps. ere are two main situations in which you might
want to try this:
• When you’re rst getting started and you nd that the more broadly
focused steps—3, 5, and 6—are hard to follow without getting
distracted, you can skip them for the time being and focus rst on the
more narrowly focused steps—1, 2, and 4—until you can stay with
them consistently. Only then should you expand your practice to
include the other three. However many sessions of meditation this
may take doesn’t matter. What matters is that you’re able to maintain
a comfortable center. at will help you add the remaining steps with
a greater sense of stability.

48
• When you’re skilled at combining all six steps and you want to gain
practice in bringing the mind to stillness as quickly as possible, you
can focus on steps 4, 5, and 6. In other words, once you’ve learned
from experience where your mind feels most comfortably centered, try
settling down quickly in that spot, allow it to get comfortable, and
then see how quickly you can spread your awareness along with the
comfortable breath to ll the entire body and then keep it lled. is
is a useful skill to develop, not only in the context of formal
meditation, but also in daily life. is point will be discussed further
in Part ree.
ese are just a few of the ways you might want to experiment. In
general, though, it’s usually best to begin with the six steps, in order, so as
to have a clear roadmap in mind each time you sit down to meditate.
at way, when you’ve wandered oﬀ, you’ll nd it easier to pick up where
you left oﬀ. And if a particular stage in the practice goes especially well,
you’ll be better able to remember it because you know where it is on the
map.
III : LEAVING MEDITATION
ere are three steps to leaving meditation skillfully.
1. Reect on how your meditation went.
e purpose here is to pick up useful points for the next time you
meditate. Was there any time during the past session that the mind felt
especially calm and centered? If there was, ask yourself, “Where were you
focused? What was the quality of your focus? What was the quality of
your breath? What did you do leading up to that point in your
meditation?” Try to remember these things for the next session. You may
nd that you can re-create that sensation of calm just by repeating the
same steps. If you can’t, put that memory aside and focus totally on what
you’re doing in the present. Try to be more observant of these things the
next time. It’s through being observant that the meditation develops as a

49
skill and gives more reliable results. It’s like being a good cook: If you
notice which foods please the people you’re cooking for, you give them
more of the same, and eventually you’ll get a bonus or a raise in pay.
2. Spread thoughts of goodwill again.
ink of whatever peace and calm you felt for the past session, and
dedicate it to other beings: either specic people you know who are
suﬀering right now, or all living beings in all directions—all our
companions in birth, aging, illness, and death. May we all nd peace and
well-being in our hearts.
3. Try to stay sensitive to the breath energy in the body as you open your
eyes and leave the meditation posture.
Don’t let your awareness of the visual eld crowd out your awareness
of the body-eld. And don’t let your concern for your next activity cause
you to drop your awareness of the breath energy in the body. Try to
maintain that sense of full-body awareness as consistently as you can.
You may not be able to keep track of the in-and-out breath as you engage
in other activities, but you can maintain an overall sense of the quality of
breath energy throughout the body. Keep it relaxed and owing. Notice
when you lose your awareness of it; notice how you can regain it. Try to
keep the sense of awareness of the breath energy in the body as constant
as you can until the next time you sit down to meditate. is way you
maintain a solid, nourishing foundation for the mind as you go through
the day. is gives you a sense of groundedness. at groundedness
provides not only a sense of security and inner ease, but also a basis for
observing the movements of the mind. is is one of the ways in which
steady mindfulness and alertness form a foundation for insight.
In other words, the most skillful way to leave meditation is not to
leave it entirely. Keep it going as much and as long as you can.
IV : MEDITATING IN OTHER POSTURES
Walking Meditation

50
Walking meditation is a good transition between maintaining a still
mind when the body is still, and maintaining a still mind in the midst of
all your activities. As you walk in a meditative way, you gain practice in
protecting the stillness of the mind in the midst of the motion of the
body, while at the same time dealing with the fewest possible outside
distractions.
An ideal time to practice walking meditation is right after you’ve been
doing sitting meditation, so that you can bring a mind already stilled, to
at least some extent, to the practice.
Some people, though, nd that the mind settles down more quickly
while sitting if they’ve done a session of walking meditation rst. is is a
matter of personal temperament.
If you’re meditating right after a meal, it’s wise to do walking
meditation rather than sitting meditation, for the motion of the body
helps both to digest your food and to ward oﬀ drowsiness.
ere are two ways of practicing walking meditation: walking back
and forth on a set path, and going for a stroll. e rst way is more
conducive for helping the mind to settle down; the second is more
convenient when you don’t have access to an undisturbed path where you
can walk back and forth without rousing curiosity or concerns from other
people.
1. Walking on a path. Choose a level path anywhere from 20 to 70
paces long. Ideally, it should be a straight path, but if you can’t nd a
straight path that long, try an L-shaped or a U-shaped path. If you’re
going to time your meditation, set the timer and put it someplace near
the path but facing away so that you won’t be able to see how much time
is left while you’re walking.
Stand at one end of the path for a moment. Gently clasp one hand
with the other, either in front of you or behind you, and let your arms
hang down comfortably. If you have your hands in front of you, have both
palms facing your body. If behind you, have both palms facing away from

51
your body. Close your eyes and check to see if your body feels properly
aligned, leaning neither to the left nor to the right. If it feels out of
alignment, relax the muscles that are pulling it out of alignment, so that
your body is as balanced as possible.
Bring your attention to the breath. Take a couple of long, deep in-and-
out breaths, and focus your attention on the breath sensations in one part
of the body. It’s usually wise, in the beginning, to choose a point
anywhere on a line drawn down the middle of the front of your torso. If
you focus in your head, you tend to stay in your head: You don’t get a
clear sense of the body walking, and it’s easy to slip oﬀ into thoughts of
the past and future. If you focus on a point on one side of the body, it can
pull you out of balance.
However, if in the beginning you nd it hard to keep track of a still
point in the torso, you can simply stay aware of the movement of your
legs or feet, or of the sensations in your hands. As your mind settles
down, you can then try nding a comfortable place in the torso.
Breathe in a way that allows the spot you’ve chosen to feel
comfortable, open, and refreshed.
Open your eyes and gaze either straight ahead of you, or down at the
path several paces in front of you, but don’t let your head tilt forward.
Keep it straight.
Make sure that you’re still clearly aware of the point of your internal
focus on the breath, and then start walking. Walk at a normal pace, or
slightly slower than normal. Don’t gaze around while you walk. Maintain
your inner attention at your chosen point in the body all along the path.
Allow the breath to nd a comfortable rhythm. ere’s no need to
breathe in sync with your steps.
When you reach the other end of the path, stop for a moment to make
sure that your attention is still with your chosen point. If it’s wandered
oﬀ, bring it back. en turn to face in the opposite direction and walk
back to where you started, maintaining focus on your chosen point. Stop
at that end of the path for a moment again, to make sure that your

52
attention is still with your chosen point. en turn to face in the opposite
direction and walk back again. If you nd it helpful in calming the mind,
you can decide beforehand to turn either clockwise or counter-clockwise
each time you turn.
Repeat these steps until your predetermined time is over.
In the beginning it’s best to focus on maintaining your attention at
your one chosen point in the body as much as you can, as you would in
step 4 of the sitting meditation. is is because you’re balancing attention
to several things at once: your chosen point, the fact that you’re walking,
and the fact that you have to be aware enough of your surroundings so
that you don’t stray oﬀ the path, walk past the designated end, or bump
into anything. at’s enough to keep you fully occupied at rst.
As you get more procient at this, you can start paying more attention
to how the breath energies ow in the diﬀerent parts of your body as you
walk—while at the same time maintaining the primary focus at your
chosen point—in much the same way that you maintain a centered but
broad awareness in step 5 of the sitting meditation. You can make a game
of seeing how quickly you can move from being focused comfortably on
one spot to spreading your awareness and the sense of comfort
throughout the body. Once it’s spread, see how long you can keep it that
way as you continue walking. As we’ll see in Part ree, this is an
important skill to develop to maintain a sense of secure well-being
throughout daily life.
Some people nd that their minds can gather into strong
concentration while walking. But generally, you’ll nd that you can get
into deeper concentration while sitting than while walking, because you
have more things to keep track of while you’re walking. However, the fact
that your attention has to move between three things when you’re
walking—your still point, the motion of your walking, and an awareness
of your surroundings—means that you get to see clearly the movements
of the mind in a restricted eld. is provides a good opportunity for

53
observing them carefully and for gaining insight into their various ways of
deceiving you.
For instance, you’ll come to notice how unbidden thoughts try to take
advantage of the fact that the mind is moving quickly among three things.
ese thoughts slip into that movement and hijack it, directing it away
from your meditation. As soon as you notice this happening, stop
walking for a moment, return your attention to your chosen spot, and
then resume walking. Ultimately you’ll see the movement of those
unbidden thoughts but won’t move along with them. When you don’t
move with them, they go for just a little way and then disappear. is is
an important skill in gaining insight into the workings of the mind.
2. Going for a stroll. If you’re going to practice walking meditation by
going for a stroll, you have to lay down a few rules for yourself so that it
doesn’t turn into just an ordinary stroll.
Choose an area that’s relatively quiet and where you won’t run into
people who will want you to stop and chat with them. A park is good, as
is a quiet, backcountry lane. If you’re walking around your neighborhood,
go in a direction you don’t normally go and where the neighbors won’t try
to engage you in conversations. If someone does call out to you, make it a
rule that you’ll nod and smile in response, but won’t say any more words
than are necessary.
Before you start your walk, stand for a moment to put your body in
alignment, and bring your attention to your chosen spot for observing the
breath. Breathe in a way that keeps that spot comfortable and refreshed.
ink of it as a bowl lled to the brim with water, and you don’t want to
spill a drop.
Walk at a normal pace in a manner that’s composed but doesn’t look
unnatural. You want to keep your secret: that you’re doing walking
meditation and you don’t want anyone else to know. Gaze around only as
much as is necessary and appropriate to keep yourself safe.

54
If your thoughts start wandering oﬀ, stop for a moment and
reestablish your primary focus at your chosen point. Take a couple of
especially refreshing breaths, and then resume walking. If people are
around, and you don’t want to call attention to yourself, pretend that
you’re looking at something to the side of your path while reestablishing
your focus.
Whether you practice walking meditation on a set path or as a stroll,
conclude the session by standing still for a moment and following the
three steps for leaving meditation, as discussed under section III, above.
Standing Meditation
Standing meditation is rarely done on its own. It’s more often done as
a part of walking meditation. It’s especially good for ve situations while
you’re walking:
1. When your thoughts slip away from the breath, stop and stand for a
moment until you can reestablish your focus at your chosen point. en
resume walking. If your mind is especially restless, you may want to stand
for a while. In this case, take advantage of the fact that you’re standing
still, close your eyes, and see if the body feels aligned. If you’re slouching,
straighten up, pull in your stomach a bit, pull your shoulders back and
then down a bit, to create a slight arch in your back. If you’re leaning to
one side or the other, relax whichever muscles are pulling you out of
alignment. en relax into this straightened posture so that you can
maintain it with a minimum of strain.
2. When the walking has you fatigued but you aren’t yet ready to stop
walking meditation, stand for a few minutes to rest, paying attention to
your posture as in step 1.
3. When you’re trying to master the skill of spreading your awareness,
along with the comfortable breath, from one spot to ll the entire body,
you might nd it easier to do this while you’re standing still. Once it’s
spread, resume walking. If you lose that sense of the entire body, stop and
stand still so that you can recover it more easily.

55
4. When the mind, in spite of the movement of the body, gathers into
a strong sense of concentration, stop and stand still to allow it to gather
fully. Some meditators arrange a place next to their meditation path
where they can sit down if the mind gathers so strongly that even
standing still is a distraction.
5. When an interesting insight into the mind comes to you while
you’re walking, stop and stand so that you can observe it more carefully.
In cases like this, you may not want to devote too much attention to your
posture, as that might distract you from what you’re observing in the
mind.
As a general rule, while standing, keep your hands clasped in front of
you or behind you as you would when walking.
Meditation Lying Down
To meditate while lying down is very conducive for attaining strong
concentration. Some people nd that it’s actually more conducive for
concentration than the sitting posture.
However, it’s also conducive for falling asleep. is is why your main
concern when meditating while lying down is to stay awake.
It’s generally better to meditate while lying on your right side, rather
than on your left side, on your back, or on your stomach. If you have to
lie down for long periods of time—as when you’re ill—there’s nothing
wrong with shifting your posture among these four lying postures and
meditating all the while.
However, lying on the right side has three advantages. First is that the
heart is above the head, which improves the blood ow to the brain.
(is means that if your physiology is reversed, with the heart on your
right side, you’d do better to meditate while lying on your left side.)
Second, it’s better for digestion. ird—and here lying on the right side
shares this point with lying on the left—you can make a point of placing
one foot on top of the other and keeping it there, not allowing it to slip

56
oﬀ. e amount of attention this requires you to devote to your feet can
help keep you awake.
Have your head supported with a pillow at the proper height for
keeping your spine relatively straight. If you’re lying on your right side,
place your right arm slightly in front of you so that the body doesn’t
weigh on it. Fold your arm so that your right hand is lying palm-up in
front of your face. Allow your left arm to lie straight along the body, with
your left palm facing down.
e steps for surveying your mind, focusing on the breath, and leaving
meditation are the same as for sitting meditation.
V : BECOMING A MEDITATOR
Meditating is one thing. Becoming a meditator is something else. It
means developing a set of inner identities around the activities of
meditation. Ideally, as you meditate, these identities should take on
growing inuence within your inner committee.
e activities around which these identities grow are the three needed
for concentration: mindfulness, alertness, and ardency. When you focus
on the breath in line with the above instructions, mindfulness is what
keeps the instructions in mind, alertness is what watches what you’re
doing and the results that come from what you’re doing, while ardency is
what tries to do it well. When you slip oﬀ the breath, ardency tries to
come right back to the breath as quickly as possible. While you’re with
the breath, ardency tries to be as sensitive as possible to what’s going well
and what isn’t. When things aren’t going well, it tries to gure out why, so
that it can improve them. When they are going well, it tries to maintain
them so that they can grow.
As these qualities get stronger with practice, they begin to coalesce
into two distinct identities, two new members of your mind’s committee.
e more passive of the two is the observer, which develops around
alertness. is is the part of the mind that steps back a bit and simply
watches what’s going on with a minimum of interference. As it develops,

57
it gives you practice in exercising your patient endurance—your ability to
stick with things even when they’re unpleasant—and in exercising your
equanimity, your ability not to react to things, so that you can see them
clearly for what they are.
e more active of the two identities is the doer, which develops
around mindfulness and ardency. is is the part that tries to make
things go well; that, when they aren’t going well, asks questions and
investigates to understand why, tries to remember what worked in the
past, and then decides how to respond—when it’s best to interfere and
when it’s not. When things are going well, this identity tries to keep them
going well. Over the course of time, you’ll nd that the doer can assume
many roles, such as the investigator and the director. is part exercises
your ingenuity and imagination, as you try to shape things in the best
possible direction.
ese two identities help each other along. e observer provides the
doer with accurate information on which to base its decisions so that it
doesn’t simply try to force its will on things and deny when it’s done
harm. e doer does its best to make sure that the observer doesn’t lose
balance and start providing biased information—as when it’s tempted to
stay focused on one side of an issue and to ignore another side.
Sometimes the back-and-forth between these two identities is fairly
quick. At other times—especially when you can’t gure something out
and simply have to watch what’s going on—you’ll nd yourself
identifying with the observer for a fairly long time before gaining enough
information to pass on to the doer.
A large part of the skill in meditating is learning when to assume these
identities while you practice. ey’re especially helpful in dealing with
problems in the mind, as we’ll see in Part Two. When you’re faced with
pain, for instance, they provide you with alternative identities that you
can assume in relation to the pain. Instead of having to be the victim of
the pain, you can be the observer of the pain. Or you can take on the role

58
of the investigator, trying to gure out what the pain is and why the mind
is turning it into a burden.
Similarly, when an unskillful emotion comes into the mind, you don’t
have to identify yourself as the person who feels the emotion or agrees
with it. You can be the observer, stepping back from the emotion. Or, as
the doer, you can be the investigator, taking the emotion apart; or the
director, assembling a new emotion to replace it.
As your concentration strengthens, the observer and doer will
continue to be helpful. On the level of strong concentration called jhana
(see Part Four), they turn into a factor called evaluation: the discernment
factor that helps to settle the mind down through understanding its
needs and providing for them. e observer acts as the passive side of
evaluation, the doer acts as the active side. Working together, they can
take you far in the practice.
So even though these members of your committee are forms of
becoming, they’re useful forms. Don’t throw them away until you reach
the point where they have no more help to oﬀer. In the meantime, get to
know them by exercising them. Because your mind’s committee has a lot
of unskillful members, you’ll need all the inner help you can get.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
On meditation as a skill: “e Joy of Eﬀort” and “Strength Training
for the Mind” in Head & Heart Together; “Joy in Eﬀort” in Meditations5;
“Adolescent Practice” in Meditations2
A talk by Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo—“Observe & Evaluate” in Inner
Strength—also gives a good perspective on meditation as a skill.
On the role of desire and imagination in the practice: “Pushing the
Limits” in Purity of Heart
On the relationship between mindfulness and concentration: “e
Path of Concentration & Mindfulness” in Noble Strategy
For more advanced discussions of mindfulness and concentration:
Right Mindfulness; Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo – Frames of Reference

59
On breath meditation: Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo, Keeping the Breath
in Mind, in particular “Method 2.” Ajaan Lee’s talks in Lessons in Samadhi
are very useful for getting a fuller perspective on his approach to breath
meditation, as are the talks in the section of Inner Strength entitled,
“Inner Skill.” e short fragments in the sections of e Skill of Release
entitled “Beginning Concentration,” “e Basics of Breathing,” and “All-
around Discernment” oﬀer useful tips.
For more useful tips, see the sections of Ajaan Fuang Jotiko –
Awareness Itself entitled, “Meditation,” “Breathing,” “Visions & Signs,”
and “Right at Awareness”
On the brahmaviharas: “Head & Heart Together” in Head & Heart
Together; “Metta Means Good Will” and “e Limits of the Unlimited
Attitudes” in Beyond All Directions; “e Sublime Attitudes” in
Meditations2
On walking meditation: “Walking Meditation: Stillness in Motion” in
Meditations4
For short talks to read before you meditate: any of the books in the
Meditations series
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):
2012/2/4: In Shape to Meditate   (read)
2004/7/24: Maintaining Goodwill   (read)
2005/9/2: Metta Meditation   (read)
2011/12/21: Goodwill and Heedfulness   (read)
e collection of talks entitled Basics contains many talks dealing with
issues that arise as you start learning how to focus on the breath.
2011/8/10: Gather ’Round the Breath   (read)
2006/11/3: Allowing the Breath to Spread   (read)
2010/2/7: Brahmaviharas at the Breath   (read)
2011/12/5: Turn Oﬀ the Automatic Pilot   (read)
2012/7/21: Choiceful Awareness   (read)

60
2011/8/16: Artillery All Around   (read)
2011/12/6: Views, Virtue, & Mindfulness   (read)
2005/4/22: Ekaggata   (read)
2011/4/10: Training Your Minds   (read)
2011/9/27: Equanimity   (read)
2012/1/21: A Mirror for the Mind   (read)
2007/5/8: Centered in the Body   (read)
2010/3/28: Mindful Judgment   (read)

61
PA R T  T W O
Common Problems
Everyone encounters problems and diﬃcult patches in the course of
meditating, so don’t let them get you upset. Don’t view them as signs that
you’re making no progress or that you’re a hopeless meditator. Problems
are an excellent opportunity for guring out where you have unskillful
habits and learning how to do something about them. is is what
develops your discernment. In fact, the process of learning how to deal
with the two most common problems in meditation, pain and wandering
thoughts, is what has brought many people in the past to awakening.
e strategies oﬀered here in Part Two focus on what you might do to
deal with these problems while you’re meditating. If you nd that they
don’t work for you, try improvising some solutions on your own. is is
how you develop your own personal tool kit as a meditator, so that you
have a wide range of strategies for dealing with problems as they occur. If
you stick to only one strategy, the anti-meditation factions of your
committee will quickly nd ways to work around that strategy. If you can
vary your strategies, you’re not such an easy mark for their ploys.
If nothing you do while meditating seems to work, the real problem
may lie in the way you live your life as a whole. Suggestions for how you
might adjust your life to support your meditation are given in Part ree.
PAIN
Pain is something you will encounter, on and oﬀ, throughout the
course of meditation, so you have to learn to view it with discernment
and equanimity, as something perfectly normal. Again, don’t let yourself
get upset around the pain. You might nd it useful to drop the word
“pain,” and replace it with “pains,” for not all pains are alike. Learning the

62
diﬀerences among them is one of the prime ways you’ll develop
discernment into the workings of the mind.
If the pains you encounter while sitting in meditation are connected to
an old injury, surgery, or structural imbalance, adjust your posture so as
not to aggravate your condition. For instance, if you’re trying to sit cross-
legged but have an injured knee, you might place a folded blanket or
small pillow under the knee to help support it. If this doesn’t help, sit in a
chair.
A good rule of thumb is that if the pain disappears a few minutes after
getting up from meditation, you know you aren’t harming your body.
If, as you’re just getting started in the meditation, the pain makes it
impossible to keep focused on the breath, tell yourself that you’ll sit with
it for a few minutes so that you don’t get into the habit of jumping every
time it cracks the whip, and then you’ll mindfully shift your posture.
However, if you encounter pain in the meditation that’s not connected
with a preexisting condition, and your concentration is a little more
developed, you should use the pain as an opportunity to develop both
your concentration and your discernment. ere are three steps in doing
this.
1. Don’t change your posture and don’t focus attention directly on the
pain. Keep your attention focused on a part of the body you can make
comfortable by the way you breathe. Ignore the emergency bulletins that
some of the committee members of the mind are sending to you about
the pain: that it’s going to damage you, that you can’t stand it, whatever.
Just tell yourself that pain is normal, that the pain before you die may
well be worse than this, so it’s good to learn how to deal with pain while
you’re still alive and relatively healthy.
Also remind yourself that the pain is not your pain unless you lay
claim to it, so why lay claim to it? Just let it be there in its part of the
body, while you train yourself to stay rmly in another part of the body.
It’s like eating an apple with a rotten spot. Eat just the good part of the
apple and let the rotten spot go.

63
2. When the spot where your attention is focused feels really
comfortable, allow comfortable breath sensations to ow from the spot of
your focus through the pain, loosening up any feelings of tension or
tightness that may have developed around the pain. (e mind
sometimes has an unconscious habit of trying to contain the pain with a
shell of tension so that it won’t spread, but that just aggravates the pain.
Consciously breathing through that shell can disperse it.) Doing this may
make the pain go away, or it may not. If it does, you’ve learned that the
way you were breathing was aggravating the pain. Take that as a lesson
for the future. If the pain doesn’t go away, remind yourself that the duty
with regard to pain is not to make it go away. Your duty is to comprehend
it. To that aim, if you feel ready to investigate it further, go to step three.
If you don’t feel ready, you can either stay here with step two or return to
step one.
You may nd that pains in particular parts of your body respond best
to good breath energy spread from other particular spots. For example, a
pain in your stomach may be alleviated by developing pleasant breath
sensations in the area of the back right behind the stomach. A pain in
your right side may be alleviated by developing pleasant breath sensations
in the corresponding spot on the left. Pains in the legs may be alleviated
by focusing on developing pleasant breath sensations in your spine,
starting with the back of the neck and going down through the tail bone
and pelvis. ere’s a lot to explore in this area, and it’s something that
each person has to learn for him or herself, as we each have idiosyncratic
ways of relating to the breath currents and the pains in the body.
3. If the pain persists, and your concentration feels solid enough to
deal directly with it, focus on the sensation of the pain and ask yourself
questions about it.
• For example, is the pain aimed at you, or is it just happening?
• Are you trying to push it away, or are you content just to watch it
so that you can understand it?

64
• Is the pain a single, solid sensation, or is it composed of a series of
rapid sensations, arising and passing away in quick succession?
• How do you visualize the pain to yourself? What happens when
you change that visual image?
• What happens when you stop labeling it as “pain,” and simply call
it “sensation”?
• On which side of the pain do you feel you’re located? For instance,
if the pain is in the leg, do you feel that you’re located above the pain?
What happens if you tell yourself that you’re below the pain?
• Is the pain really where you think it is? For instance, if you feel a
pain in your stomach, what happens when you tell yourself that it’s
actually in your back?
• Is the pain the same thing as the body, or is it something else?
(is question works best when you’ve learned to analyze the way you
experience the body from within in terms of four properties: energy,
solidity, warmth, and coolness—see the discussion under the fourth
jhana, in Part Four. When you look carefully at the sensations of pain,
you’ll see that they don’t correspond to any of these properties. e
tendency to conate the pain with the solid property is what makes
the pain seem so persistent.)
• Are you in the line of re, receiving the pain, or are you simply
watching it go past you and disappearing? (A useful perception to
hold with regard to pain is that you’re riding in the backseat of an old
station wagon, the type where the backseat faces back, and you’re
simply watching the individual sensations of pain go past you and
disappear.)
ere are many other questions you might ask yourself about the
pain. e important thing is learning to question how you perceive your
relationship to the pain. On the one hand, if you keep questioning the
pain, you don’t let yourself fall into the perception of being its passive
victim. You’re taking a more active role, as the doer, not letting things

65
take their old, accustomed course. is in itself gives you a measure of
independence from the pain. On the other hand, you’ll learn that if you
apply unskillful perceptions to the pain, they create a bridge into the
mind so that the mind feels mental pain—impatience, irritation, worry—
over the physical pain. But if you can learn to drop those perceptions,
either by replacing them with more skillful perceptions, or by dropping
—as soon as you sense them—all perceptions that develop around the
pain, the bridge is cut. e mind can be perfectly ne, even when the
body is in pain. is is an important stage in developing insight.
If you nd that the approach of examining the pain in step three isn’t
giving you any clarity around the pain, and your ability not to feel
victimized by the pain is beginning to falter, it’s a sign that your
concentration is not yet strong enough to deal directly with the pain. Go
back to steps one and two.
WANDERING THOUGHTS
One of the mind’s most basic habits is to create thought-worlds and
then to inhabit them. is is what the Buddha meant by becoming. e
ability to engage in becoming is often a useful skill, as it enables you to
use your imagination in planning for the future and contemplating
lessons from the past. But this skill can become a destructive habit, as
you create thought-worlds that develop greed, aversion, delusion, and
other destructive mental habits. Your ability to plan for the future can
turn into worries that can destroy your peace of mind. Your ability to
relive the past can make you miserable in the present.
One of the important skills in meditation is learning how to turn these
thought-worlds oﬀ and on at will, so that you can think when you need
to think, and stop thinking when you don’t. In this way, the mind’s ability
to create thought-worlds won’t cause it harm.
In the beginning stages of meditation, you need a few quick and easy
rules to help you decide whether a thought is worth following or not.
Otherwise, you’ll get sucked into every thought-world that can deceive

66
you into thinking that it deserves your attention. So while you’re learning
to focus on the breath, hold to a simple rule: Any thought connected with
improving your focus on the breath is okay. Any other thought has to be
dropped.
If a thought concerning your work or other responsibilities comes to
mind while you’re meditating, tell yourself that you’ll deal with it right
after you leave meditation. Or you may decide to set aside a ve or ten
minute period at the end of meditation specically to think about issues
in your life that require serious consideration.
If, before you start meditating, you realize that you’re facing an
important decision in life that might interfere with your meditation, tell
yourself that you’ll use the meditation period to clear your mind before
contemplating the decision. Before meditating, pose whatever questions
you want to have answers for, and then drop them. Refuse to pay them
any attention if they pop up during the meditation. Focus your attention
exclusively on the breath. When you emerge from the meditation, see if
an answer presents itself to your awareness. ere’s no guarantee that the
answer will be correct, but at least it’s coming from a quiet spot in the
mind, and it gives you something to put to the test. If no answer presents
itself, your mind is at any rate clearer and sharper than it was before the
meditation, putting you in a better position to contemplate the issues you
face. But be sure that while you’re meditating you don’t have anything to
do with thoughts about those issues at all.
ere are ve basic strategies in dealing with wandering thoughts.
Each of them helps to strengthen your concentration. But each can also
give lessons in discernment.
1. Return to the breath.
As soon as you realize that you’ve lost your focus on the breath, go
right back to the breath. Be prepared for the fact that this will happen
countless times in the course of your meditation, so be on the lookout for
the early warning signs that the mind is about to leave the breath and go

67
somewhere else. Sometimes the mind is like an inchworm at the edge of a
leaf. One end is standing on the leaf; the other end is waving around,
hoping that another leaf will come its way. As soon as it touches the new
leaf, it grabs on and lets go of the old leaf. In other words, part of your
mind may be with the breath, but another part is looking for somewhere
else to go. e more quickly you can catch sight of the mind at this stage
in the process, the better. Simply remind yourself that you’re getting
bored with the breath because you aren’t paying it careful attention. Give
yourself a couple of really refreshing breaths, and the front end of the
inchworm will get back on the original leaf. As you develop this skill, you
begin to see the stages by which the mind creates thought-worlds, which
means that you’re less likely to be fooled by them.
It’s like watching a play from behind the scenes. Ordinarily, when the
set crew changes scenes in a play, they drop a curtain before changing the
scenery. Only when the new scenery is in place do they raise the curtain,
so as not to spoil the illusion that the action has actually moved to
another location. e audience, of course, is happy to play along with the
illusion. But if you’re behind the scenes, you sense the articiality of it all
and you’re less taken in.
In the same way, as you focus on the process of thought-creation,
rather than on the content of the thoughts, you gain some important
insights into how the mind creates thought-worlds for itself—important,
because these thought-worlds are a central feature of the unnecessary
suﬀering and stress you’re trying to understand and counteract. By
focusing not on their content, but on the process by which they’re
created, you begin to free yourself from their spell.
2. Focus on the drawbacks of letting yourself stay distracted.
If simply returning to the breath isn’t enough to keep you from
continually returning to a series of thoughts, you have to look at the
drawbacks of those thoughts. is involves two steps.

68
a. Ask yourself: If you were to follow those thoughts for the next hour
or two, where would they take you? Toward a skillful life or an unskillful
one? If they’re relatively skillful, are they more skillful than a mind well
trained in meditation? No. So while you’re meditating they’re a waste of
time. And what about their entertainment value? If they were a movie,
would you pay to see them? Do you really gain anything by following
them? What exactly attracts you to those thoughts? Is the pay-oﬀ worth
the trouble they can cause? Try to nd the question that helps you see the
thoughts as clearly unworthy of your attention. When you’ve seen both
the allure and the drawbacks of a particular way of thinking, you’re
learning to see your thoughts as part of a causal process. is helps you
to free yourself from their power.
b. Once you’re clear on the drawbacks of a particular thought, you can
think of a topic that counteracts the emotion or urge lying behind it. For
instance, if a thought is motivated by anger, try countering the anger with
thoughts of goodwill—rst for yourself, then for the person you’re angry
at. If a thought is motivated by lust, think about the unattractive aspects
of the human body—again, starting rst with the contents of your own
body, then going to the body you’re attracted to. A few of these
alternative topics are discussed in the section on Disruptive Emotions,
below.
Once the new topic has weakened your desire to return to the
wandering thought, you can then turn your attention back to the breath.
3. Ignore the thoughts.
If the thoughts still keep chattering away, make up your mind that
you’ll stay with the breath and simply let the thoughts chatter away in
another part of your mind. ey’re like stray dogs: If you give them any
attention, they’ll keep pestering you. ey’re like crazy people: Even if
you try to chase them away, they’ll know that they’ve gotten to you, and
that makes them try to pull you further into their crazy worlds. So you
just ignore them. Remind yourself that even though there may be

69
thoughts in the mind, they’re just other members of the committee. ey
haven’t destroyed the breath. e breath is still there to focus on.
Eventually, from lack of attention, the distracting thoughts will go away
on their own.
At the same time, you’ve learned a lesson in how the act of attention
can strengthen or weaken the diﬀerent potentials in your experience.
4. Relax the tension that keeps the thought going.
As you get more sensitive to the subtle breath energies in the body,
you’ll come to notice that the act of holding onto a thought requires that
you develop a slight pattern of tension somewhere in the body, as a kind
of marker. Try to locate that pattern of tension, dissolve it with a breath,
and the thought will go away from lack of support.
As your concentration gets better, you’ll be able to sense these
patterns of tension forming even before they become conscious thoughts.
You’ll come to see the stages by which thought-worlds form. ey start
as little knots of tension, and then a perception is applied to them,
deciding whether to view the knots as physical or as mental phenomena.
If the decision is to regard them as mental, then a further perception is
applied: What is this thought about?
When you can see these steps, the mind in concentration becomes like
a spider on a web: You stay at your spot, and then the sensitivity of the
breath-web tells you that a knot of tension is forming at a particular
section of the web. You go there, zap the knot with a shot of good breath
energy that dissolves it, and then return to your spot.
is strategy gives important lessons in observing how physical and
mental phenomena are related to each other.
5. Suppress the thought.
If your concentration and discernment aren’t yet good enough for
these techniques to work with every distracting thought, then when
they’ve all failed with a particularly persistent thought, place the tip of

70
your tongue at the roof of your mouth, clench your teeth, and repeat to
yourself over and over that you won’t think that thought. Or you might
repeat a meditation word, like buddho, very quickly in the mind to jam
the circuits until the temptation to follow the thought has subsided.
is fth approach is like a sledgehammer compared to the other
approaches, which are more like scalpels. But just as every handyman
needs a sledgehammer in his toolkit, every meditator needs a few heavy
tools to be prepared for all eventualities. at way unskillful thoughts
won’t be able to bully you around.
is last approach involves less discernment than the other four, but it
does teach a valuable lesson: that you shouldn’t overlook a useful strategy
just because it seems elementary or crude. Be willing to use whatever
works.
Particular types of wandering thoughts—such as lust and anger—
have their own counteracting strategies. If you don’t have the energy to
apply any of these strategies to wandering thoughts, it’s a sign that the
problem is not restlessness. It’s drowsiness.
DROWSINESS
If you’re feeling sleepy, the rst step is not to immediately regard it as a
sign that you need to rest. Often the mind uses drowsiness as a way to
avoid an issue that’s about to surface from your inner depths. As a
meditator, you want to know about these deeper issues, so you can’t let
yourself be fooled by this sham drowsiness. You have to test it whenever
you encounter it.
e rst test is to change your meditation topic. When you’re with the
breath, this can mean changing the rhythm and texture of the breath, or
the spot of your focus. For example:
• If short, gentle breathing is making you drowsy, you can try
breathing long in and short out, or breathing more heavily.

71
• If staying with a single focal point is making you drowsy, try
focusing on two points at once.
• Or you can move your focal point with every three or ve breaths.
Follow the roadmap given under step 3 in the section on Focusing on
the Breath, or any other roadmap you may devise.
• Or try evaluating the breath energy in areas you tend to overlook.
Alternatively, you can change your meditation topic to one of the
subsidiary topics listed in the Appendix. Contemplation of death—that
death could happen at any time—is especially useful when drowsiness is
coupled with laziness.
Or you can recite to yourself any poem or chanting passage that you
may have memorized.
e second test is to change your posture. Get up from your meditation
and rub your limbs with your hands. If it’s night and you can see the
night sky, look up at the stars to freshen the mind. Wash your face. en
return to the sitting position.
e third test is to get up and do walking meditation. If that doesn’t
remove the drowsiness, try walking carefully backwards to see if the fear
of running into anything will keep you awake.
If the drowsiness remains, it’s a sign that the body needs to rest. Lie
down and meditate until you fall asleep, rst promising yourself that
you’ll get up and meditate again as soon as you wake up. You won’t keep
wallowing in the pleasure of lying down.
DELUSION CONCENTRATION
Closely related to drowsiness is a state of mind called delusion
concentration. e mind is still, but you’re not clearly aware of where
your attention is focused. When you come out of it, you may wonder
whether you were asleep or awake. is can happen when the breath gets
comfortable but you don’t spread your awareness to other parts of the
body. You’re focused on a small area, and when the breath in that area

72
gets very rened and comfortable, you lose track of it and slip into a
pleasant, still, but blurry state of mind.
One way to prevent this is, as soon as the breath gets comfortable, to
immediately start surveying the rest of the body. Try to notice how the
breath energy is owing in all the nooks and crannies of the body, even
down to the spaces between the ngers and toes. Alternatively, you can
visualize the various parts of the body—the bones, the organs—and see
if the breath energy is spreading smoothly to those parts.
e important principle here is that when the mind is comfortable, it
needs some work to do. Otherwise, it will drift oﬀ into drowsiness. As
long as the work stays within the connes of the body, it won’t disturb
your concentration. In fact, it will make the concentration even stronger
and more resilient.
e phenomenon of falling into an “air pocket”—i.e., sitting very still
and then suddenly being awakened by your head falling forward—comes
from the same causes and can be cured in the same ways.
EXTERNAL NOISES
If you nd yourself complaining about external noises while you’re
meditating, remind yourself that the noise isn’t bothering you. You’re
bothering the noise. Can you let the noise exist without your
commenting on it? After all, the noise has no intention to bother you.
Also, think of your body as a screen on a large window. e noise is
like the wind going through the screen. In other words, you oﬀer no
resistance to the noise, but you don’t let yourself be aﬀected by it. It goes
right through you without making physical or mental contact.
TROUBLES WITH THE BREATH ITSELF
1. Probably one of the most discouraging obstacles to breath
meditation is an inability to feel the in-and-out breath. is often comes
from an earlier physical or emotional experience that has caused you to
block oﬀ your sensation of the body. You may require time to build up a

73
sensitivity to the felt reality of the breath in the body, or to feel at ease
with that sensitivity. is is an area that requires patience.
ere are two possible approaches.
• One is to ask yourself where you do feel the breath. It may be only in
the head or at some other isolated part of the body. Still, that gives you
something to start with. Focus on that area gently but steadily, with an
attitude of goodwill for it, telling yourself that you belong there. When
you nd that you can stay there with a sense of ease, gradually try to
expand your sense of awareness right around that spot. What part of the
body is right next to it? In which direction do you feel that part? (Your
inner sense of the parts of your body may not be in alignment with how
the body looks from the outside, but don’t let that concern you right now.
Where do you feel the next part?) If a sense of fear arises, go back to the
original area. Wait for a day or so, and then try expanding your
awareness slightly again. Keep this up, back and forth, until you can
inhabit the enlarged area with a sense of condence. Be patient. If any
specic fears or memories come up as you try to expand your awareness
in this way, talk them over with someone whose judgment you trust.
• A second approach is to drop the breath for the time being and to
develop the brahmaviharas (see Part One, section I, above) as your basic
meditation exercise until you feel condent enough to try working with
the breath again.
2. Another problem that can often be discouraging is an inability to
nd a comfortable breath. No matter how you adjust the breath, it doesn’t
feel right. ere are several ways to approach this problem.
• Ask yourself if you’re being too demanding. Does the breath feel
okay? Are you trying to force it to be better than okay? If that’s what’s
happening, be patient. Stick with the okay breath and give it some time.
Your impatience may be putting too much strain on it. Allow it some
time to relax and develop on its own.

74
• Ask yourself if you’re pinching the end of the out-breath to clearly
mark it oﬀ from the following in-breath, or vice versa. is limits the
ability of the breath to ow smoothly. If this is the case, allow the end of
each out-breath to meld smoothly with the beginning of the following in-
breath, and vice versa, so that the still moment between the breaths can
have a chance to let a sense of ease spread through the body.
• Remind yourself that each breath will have at least one part—at the
beginning, in the middle, or near the end—that feels more comfortable
than not breathing. Look for that part of the breath and allow yourself to
appreciate it. When this calms you down, the other parts of the breath
cycle will be able to relax.
• Ask yourself if you’re focusing too hard in one spot. ere’s a
common tendency, when you’re focused on a particular part of the body,
to put pressure on it—usually blocking or straining the way the blood
ows in that part of the body. See if you can release that pressure but still
maintain focus on that spot.
• Ask yourself if the way you visualize the breath to yourself is part of
the problem. For example, do you visualize it as coming into the body
only through one tiny spot, such as the nose? If so, that might be
restricting the breath. Try visualizing the body as a sponge, with breath
coming in and out easily through all the pores. Or you can ask yourself if
you visualize the breath as unwilling to come into the body. If so, you’ll
nd yourself having to force it in. Try visualizing it as wanting to come
into the body, and all you have to do is allow it in.
• Ask yourself if you’re unconsciously forcing the breath to comply
with any cartoon ideas you might have of what comfortable breathing
should feel like. People often assume that slow, long breathing is more
comfortable than short, fast breathing, but that’s not always the case.
Remind yourself that what counts as comfortable breathing is
determined by what the body needs right now, so try to be more sensitive
to those needs.

75
• Ask yourself if you’re trying to control the breath too much. You can
test this by focusing attention on a part of the body where you have no
sense of being able to control the movement of the breath, such as the
base of the spine.
• If none of these approaches work, switch the topic of your focus to a
theme that you nd pleasurable and inspiring, such as goodwill,
generosity (thinking of the times you were generous of your own free
will), gratitude (thinking of people who went out of their way to help
you), or virtue (thinking of cases where you or someone you admire
behaved in ways you nd noble and inspiring). Allow yourself to think
about that theme for a while without paying attention to the breath.
When the mind feels refreshed, try to notice how you’re breathing while
you’re with that theme. e breath will have found a comfortable rhythm
on its own. at will give you some ideas about how to breathe
comfortably.
3. A third common problem is an inability to feel breath sensations in
diﬀerent parts of the body. is is often a problem of perception: e
breath sensations are there, but you don’t recognize them as such. Part of
your mind may think that it’s impossible for there to be breath energies
owing through the body. If that’s the case, treat this as an exercise in
imagination: Allow yourself to imagine that breathing energy can ow
through the nerves, and imagine it owing in some of the patterns
recommended in the basic instructions. Or imagine it owing in the
opposite directions. At some point, you will actually start to feel the
movement of energy in one part of the body or another, and then this will
no longer be an exercise in imagination.
In the meantime, survey the body and relax any patterns of tension
you may feel in its various parts. Start with the hands and work up the
arms. en start with the feet and work up through the legs, the back,
the neck, and into the head. en do the front of the torso. e more
relaxed the body, the more easily the breath energy will ow, and the
more likely that you’ll be able to sense the ow.

76
UNUSUAL ENERGIES & SENSATIONS
Pressure. As you release tension or tightness in diﬀerent parts of the
body, it can often give rise to unusually strong or unbalanced energies or
sensations. is is normal, and these energies, if left alone, can often
work themselves out. However, there are two cases where they can
become a problem.
1. e rst is when the release is not complete—when energy released
from one area gets stuck in another, creating a strong sense of pressure.
Two common areas where pressure tends to build up are in the head and
around the heart. If the pressure is in the head, check to see whether the
energy needs to drain down the front of the throat or down the spine.
First focus on opening the energy channel down the front of your throat,
and place your attention in the middle of the chest. ink of the energy
draining down the channel in the throat to the area where you’re focused,
both during the in-breath and during the out.
If that doesn’t work, consciously trace the energy channels down either
side of the spine to see if there’s a point of blockage at any point. If you
nd one, think of it relaxing. Do this all the way down the spine. Focus
your attention at your tailbone. en visualize the breath going down the
spine—again, both during the in-breath and during the out—and then
owing through your tailbone into the air.
If the pressure is in the middle of the chest, visualize opening the
energy channels going out your arms through the palms of your hands.
Focus your attention at the palms of your hands and think of breath
energy radiating out from your chest—both during the in-breath and
during the out—and going out through your palms.
You can also try a similar visualization with energy channels going
down your legs and out through the soles of your feet.
As you open these channels, don’t think of pushing the energy into
them. In particular, don’t think that you’re trying to push air into them.
e breath you’re working with is energy, not air. And energy ows best
when it’s not pressured. Simply think, “Allow.” And be patient. Try to

77
distinguish between the ow of the blood—which, because it’s liquid, can
build up pressure when it runs up against something solid—and the ow
of the breath, which as an energy doesn’t need to build up pressure, as it
can ow right through solids.
If you feel excess pressure in other parts of the body, try connecting
those parts, in your imagination, with the energy channels going out the
arms or legs.
2. e other main cause of excess pressure in diﬀerent parts of the
body is when, in an eﬀort to speed up the movement of the breath energy
in the body, you push it too much. Here again, the key word is “allow.”
Allow the energy to ow. Don’t push it. A comfortable energy, when
pushed, becomes uncomfortable. Be patient. Visualize a subtle breath
energy that, as soon as you’re aware that you’ve started breathing in, has
already spread throughout the body. After a while, you’ll sense that it
really is there.
A tightness that doesn’t respond to the breath. If there are islands of
tightness in the body that won’t dissolve no matter how comfortable the
breath, you have to work around them. e more directly you focus on
them, the worse they may get. So breathe gently around their edges and
give them some space. ey often represent members of your inner
committee who don’t trust your good intentions, so you simply have to
let them be. Be patient with them. At some point they’ll dissolve on their
own.
Bands of tension running through the body. Check rst to see if the
bands of tension really are bands, or if the mind is playing connect-the-
dots with them. In other words, there are occasions when the mind
notices spots of tension in diﬀerent parts of the body and connects them
under a single perception of tension. is creates the sensation that the
isolated spots are part of a single sensation.
To test if this is the case, imagine that your awareness is a set of buzz-
saw blades, quickly and repeatedly cutting the bands of tension into
isolated pieces wherever it notices them. If this lightens the sense of

78
tension, then hold that perception in mind. e problem is not with the
tension as much as it was with the perception that labeled the spots of
tension as bands. Keep refusing to believe in that band-perception,
replacing it with the perception of saw blades as long as necessary.
If the bands of tension are in the head and seem to surround the head,
an alternative way of shifting the perception is to hold in mind the image
that your head is larger than the bands of tension, and that the larger part
of the head is lled with soft energy that allows the bands to dissipate.
If the sense of a band of tension remains in spite of the new
perceptions, then it’s a sign the band corresponds to an area of the body
that’s starved of breath energy. As you breathe in, think of the breath
energy going immediately to that part of the body. Allow the in-breath to
be as long as it needs to be to give that area a sense of being nourished.
If, after several minutes of trying this approach, the bands of tension
don’t respond, then ignore them for a while. Try these various approaches
again later when your concentration has improved.
A lack of sensation. As you survey the various parts of your body, you
may nd that there are some parts where you feel no sensation at all: your
shoulder, for example, or part of your back. It seems as if that part of the
body is missing. When this is the case, try to be conscious of the parts
that you can sense on either side of the missing part. For example, with
the shoulder: Try to be aware of your neck and your upper arm. en try
to see where the energy in those two parts connects. You may be
surprised to see that there is a connection, but it’s not where your
shoulder “should” be—and because it’s not where it should be, you’ve
unconsciously been blocking it. Allow it to open up and over time your
sense of those parts of the body will adjust and the missing part of the
body will get more nourishment from the breath. It’ll reappear in your
awareness.
A sense of fullness. is sensation often comes when the breath
energy dissolves some of its inner blockages, and areas that were starved
of energy suddenly ll up. is relates to one of the factors of jhana:

79
rapture. In strong cases, it can feel as if you’re drowning in the fullness.
Some people nd this pleasant, but others nd it threatening. If you’ve
ever come close to drowning, this can easily bring up a sense of fear. e
way to counteract the fear is to remind yourself that you’re surrounded by
air, and the body can breathe as much as it likes. Relax your hands and
feet, and keep them relaxed. en see if you can nd the aspect of the
fullness that’s pleasant. Focus on that. Or simply maintain your focus on
your usual point of focus in the body, and remind yourself that the
fullness, if left alone, will eventually dissipate into a sense of stillness and
ease.
Another group of people who nd this sense of fullness threatening
are those who fear that they’re losing control. e solution again is not to
focus on the fullness, but to stay focused on your usual point of focus,
and remember that the fullness will pass.
A feeling of density. Sometimes, as the mind settles down, the body
feels so solid and dense that breathing becomes a chore. One possible
reason for this is that you’re subconsciously holding onto the perception
of the body as a solid object, and of the breath as something that has to
be pushed through the solidity. e solution is consciously to change
your perception. For instance, you can remind yourself that the breath is
actually your primary sensation of the body: e energy of the breath is
there rst, and the sense of solidity comes later. So you don’t have to push
the breath through a wall of solidity. Let it ow freely wherever it wants.
Another useful perception is to think of all the space around the body
and in-between the atoms in the body. Even within the atoms, there’s
more space than matter. Everything is permeated by space. As you hold
this perception in mind, the diﬃculty in breathing will go away.
Another possible reason for the sense that the body is too solid to
breathe is that the mind may be so quiet that you don’t need to breathe
(see the discussion under e Fourth Jhana in Part Four.) You keep on
trying to push the breath through the body more out of habit than of

80
need. So tell yourself, “If the body needs to breathe, it’ll breathe on its
own. You don’t have to force it to breathe.”
Dizziness. If this problem is caused by the meditation, it can come
from an imbalance in your focus or an imbalance in the breath.
An imbalance in your focus can come from focusing too heavily in the
head. Move your focus lower in the body, lighten up a bit so that you’re
not restricting the ow of blood in the area where you’re focused, and
stay away from the head for a while.
An imbalance in the breath might come from hyperventilating:
breathing heavily too fast. It can also come from suppressing the breath
or spending too much time with rened breathing. Try breathing in a
way that avoids these extremes. If this doesn’t take care of the dizziness, it
wasn’t caused by the meditation. It may be a sign of physical illness.
JUDGING YOUR PROGRESS
As I noted in the Introduction, the basic strategy of training the mind
to put an end to suﬀering is to reect on your actions and to question
how skillful they are, so that you can keep rening your skill. Because
meditation is an action, the same strategy applies here. To develop it as a
skill, you have to learn how to evaluate how you’re doing—what’s
working, what’s not working—so that your skill can grow. In fact,
evaluation is such an important part of meditation that it’s a factor of
jhana, which we will discuss in Part Four. is sort of evaluation is what
turns into the discernment that ultimately leads to release.
So remember: ere is such a thing as a good session and a not-so-
good session of meditation. You want to learn how to judge the
diﬀerence. However, the ability to judge your actions is, itself, a skill that
takes some time to master. If you’ve ever worked toward mastering a
physical skill or craft—such as woodworking, cooking, or playing a sport
or musical instrument—think of how you developed your powers of
judgment so that they actually helped you gain mastery. en apply the

81
same principles to the meditation. A few useful principles to keep in
mind are these:
Useful judgments focus on actions, not on your worth as a person or a
meditator.
If you nd yourself getting depressed about yourself for not being able
to do things right, or conceited when they do go right, remind yourself
that that kind of judgment is a waste of time. Negative self-judgments
sap your ability to stick with the meditation; positive self-judgments—
even though they may encourage you in the short run—will ultimately
get in the way of your progress, blinding you to your mistakes or setting
up false expectations. If you nd yourself in the downward spiral of
negatively judging yourself for judging yourself, remember the image of
the inner committee. Find a member who can gently but rmly remind
the self-judging voice that it’s wasting your time. e more good-natured
humor you can bring to the situation, the better. en focus on your next
breath, and then the next.
e one area where it is useful to evaluate yourself is in reading your
tendency to be overly positive or overly negative about your abilities. If
you know that you have a tendency in either of those directions, use that
knowledge to temper your judgments. A friendly, “Oops. ere it goes
again,” can often help bring you to your senses.
Regard your meditation as a work in progress.
You’re not here to pass nal judgment on yourself or your actions.
You’re judging your actions so that you can perform them more skillfully
the next time around. As you make a judgment, think of yourself not as a
judge on a courtroom bench, passing a verdict on an accused person, but
as a craftsperson on a workbench, judging how your work is going, and
making changes when you see you’ve made a mistake.
Mistakes are normal.

82
It’s through mistakes that you learn. e people who understand
meditation best aren’t the ones for whom everything goes smoothly.
ey’re the ones who make mistakes and then gure out how not to
make them again. So view each mistake as an opportunity to gure
things out. Don’t let it get you down. In fact, if you’re going to take pride
in anything, take pride in your willingness to notice and learn from
mistakes.
e relation between actions and results is complex, so don’t jump to quick
conclusions about what caused what in your meditation.
Sometimes the results you get right now are coming from things
you’re doing right now; sometimes they’re coming from things you did
yesterday, or last week, or even further in the past. is is why an
approach that worked yesterday might not work today. Learn how to
reserve judgment until you’ve had time to watch your meditation again
and again over time.
And don’t keep harping on about how much better your meditation
was in the past than it is today. e extent to which it was good wasn’t
caused by thinking about meditations further in the past. It was caused
by looking at the breath in the present. So learn from that lesson and
look at the breath in the present now. Also, the past meditation may not
have been as good as you thought. e fact that things aren’t yet going
well today is caused by the fact that you still have more to learn. So to
learn some of that “more,” watch the breath and your mind more carefully
right now.
Don’t be surprised by sudden reversals in your meditation.
ese, too, are caused by the complexity of how actions give their
results. When things are going so well that the mind grows still without
any eﬀort on your part, don’t get careless or overly condent. Keep up
your alertness. When your mood is so bad that you can’t stay with even
the rst step in the meditation instructions, don’t give up. View it as an
opportunity to learn more about how the principle of causality works in

83
the mind. Something must have caused the sudden change, so look for it.
At the same time, this is a good opportunity to call to mind your sense of
the inner observer, to be patient in stepping back and observing bad
moods. is way, whether the sudden reversal is for the better or the
worse, you learn a valuable lesson: how to keep your inner observer
separate from whatever else is going on so that you can watch things
more carefully.
Don’t compare yourself with others.
Your mind is your mind; their mind is theirs. It’s like being in a
hospital and comparing yourself to other patients in the ward. You don’t
gain anything from gloating over the fact that you’re recovering from your
illness faster than they are from theirs. You don’t gain anything from
making yourself miserable because they’re recovering faster than you. You
have to focus total attention on your own recovery.
While meditating, don’t compare your practice to what you’ve read in
books, this one included.
e books are there for you to read when you’re not meditating.
While you’re meditating, you want to focus on the breath. e books
simply give you ideas about what might happen. You learn even more
from watching what is happening and—if it’s called for—guring out on
the spot how to make what’s happening go better.
MAINTAINING MOTIVATION
Training the mind is a long-term project. It requires a degree of
maturity to keep motivated when the novelty and initial enthusiasm have
worn oﬀ. Especially when progress is slow, you may nd yourself
overcome with boredom, discouragement, impatience, or doubt. If your
motivation is agging because of any of these emotions, see the
recommendations given for dealing with them in the following section.
However, there are times when your motivation ags simply because
the demands of your personal life or work become so pressing that they

84
squeeze away whatever time or energy you need to meditate. If this is
happening, you have to keep reminding yourself of the importance of
meditating: that if your mind isn’t trained, it can easily respond to the
demands of your daily life in unskillful ways.
e rst point to remember is that “pressing” doesn’t always mean
“important.” Learn how to distinguish which external demands can be
put aside for a while so that you can get your mind together.
e second point to remember is that the world won’t provide you
with time to meditate. You have to make the time yourself.
ird, remember that the time you take to meditate isn’t taken away
from the people you love or are responsible for. It’s actually a gift to them
in terms of your improved state of mind.
Fourth, remember that the improved state of your mind will also help
simplify your life and make it more manageable.
So to make sure that you keep making time on a continuing basis, try
adding a few new voices to your inner committee, or strengthening them
if they’re already there—the voices that will give you pep talks and
motivate you to stay on course. Which ones will be most eﬀective for you,
you have to observe for yourself. ese will vary from person to person,
and even in the same person will vary from time to time.
Here are a few voices that other meditators have found eﬀective:
• e voice of heedfulness: the one that reminds you of the unnecessary
stress and suﬀering an untrained mind can cause for itself and for those
around you. is is the voice that also tells you, “If you don’t train your
mind, who’s going to train it for you? And if you don’t do it now, don’t
think that it’ll get easier as you get older.”
• e voice of compassion reminds you of the ways in which meditating
is an active expression of goodwill to yourself and to those around you.
You started meditating because you wanted something better than the
life you had. If you really loved yourself—and your loved ones—would
you let that opportunity slide? is voice is strengthened when you gain a

85
sense of how to breathe comfortably, for then you can remind yourself,
especially when you feel frazzled, of just how good it feels to spend some
time with nourishing breath.
• e voice of healthy pride reminds you of the satisfaction that comes
from doing something well. is is the voice that reminds you of how
good you feel when you’ve managed to behave skillfully in areas where
you weren’t so skillful before. Don’t you want to expand your range of
skills even further?
• e voice of a healthy sense of shame grows out of healthy pride. It
reminds you of some of the ways in which you’ve let the unskillful
members of your inner committee take over even when you knew better.
Do you want to keep being their slave? And if there really are people in
the world who can read minds, what would they think if they read yours?
(is sense of shame is healthy in that it’s directed not at you as a person,
but at your actions.)
• e voice of inspiration reminds you of the examples set by other
meditators in the past. ey did something noble with their lives; don’t
you want to live a noble life, too? is voice is strengthened when you
read about others who have overcome diﬃculties in their meditation and
not only achieved true peace of mind but also left behind a good example
for the world. Your sense of inspiration can also be strengthened by
associating with other meditators and gaining energy from the group.
• e voice of a wise inner parent promises you a little reward to get you
through diﬃcult patches in the practice: a harmless sensory pleasure
you’ll grant yourself if you stick to your meditation schedule.
• e voice of good-natured humor points out how foolish some of your
rationalizations for not practicing would look if you stepped back from
them a bit. Not that you’re more foolish than the norm—just that the
human norm is pretty foolish. Good-natured humor about yourself
comes from the ability to step back from your actions, just as
discernment does. at’s why famous meditation masters have such

86
sharp senses of humor. Your foibles and rationalizations, when you can
laugh at them, lose a lot of their power.
So try to gain a feel for which of these voices would stir your mind to
action, and give yourself pep talks tailored to your own psychology.
At the same time, listen to recorded Dhamma talks and nd things to
read that will remind you of the values of the practice. is will help to
keep you on course.
If your time really is at a premium, remember that you don’t have to sit
with your eyes closed when training the mind. As many teachers have
said, if you have time to breathe, you have time to meditate even while
engaged in other activities.
Also, you might nd it helpful to remind yourself that if you’re really
busy, you’re not too busy to meditate. You’re too busy not to meditate.
You owe it to yourself and to those around you to keep your batteries
well charged.
DISRUPTIVE EMOTIONS
When dealing with disruptive emotions, it’s useful to remember the
three types of fabrication mentioned in the Introduction: bodily
fabrication (the in-and-out breath); verbal fabrication (directed thought
and evaluation); and mental fabrication (feelings and perceptions). ese
are the building blocks from which emotions are fashioned. To get
yourself out of an unskillful emotion, you change the building blocks.
Don’t allow yourself to be fooled into thinking that the emotion is telling
you what you really feel. Every emotion is a bundle of fabrications, so a
skillful emotion you consciously fabricate is no less really “you” than an
unskillful emotion you’ve fabricated unconsciously out of force of habit.
So learn how to experiment with adjusting the various types of
fabrication. Sometimes just changing the way you breathe will pull you
out of an unskillful emotion; at other times you have to ddle with the
other forms of fabrication to see what works for you.

87
Here again the image of the committee is a useful background
perception: Whatever the emotion, it’s simply one of the committee
members—or a disruptive faction—claiming to speak for the whole
committee and trying to overthrow the members who want to meditate.
e number one lesson in dealing with disruptive emotions is that you
have to identify with the members who want to benet from the
meditation. If you don’t, none of these methods will work for long. If you
do, the battle is half-won.
You will have to explore and experiment on your own to see which
strategies of refabrication work for your particular emotions, but here are
a few possibilities to help you get started:
Boredom. is usually comes from not paying careful attention to
what you’re doing. If you feel that nothing is happening in the
meditation, remind yourself that you’re right at the ideal spot to observe
your mind. If you’re not seeing anything, you’re not looking. So try to
look more carefully at the breath, or make an eﬀort to see potential
distractions more quickly. Remember that the boredom itself is a
distraction. It comes, and then it goes. In other words, it’s not the case
that nothing is happening. Boredom is happening. e fact that you’re
identifying with it means that you missed the steps in its formation. Look
more carefully the next time.
A useful perception to hold in mind is that you’re like a wildlife
observer. You can’t make a date with the wildlife to come by a particular
place at a particular time. You have to go to a place where the wildlife
tends to pass by—such as a watering hole—and then sit there: very alert,
so that you can hear them coming, but also very still, so that you don’t
scare them away. e breath in the present moment is the mind’s
watering hole—where the movements of the mind most clearly show
themselves—so you’re at the right spot. Now all you have to do is learn
how to master the skill of staying both still and alert.
Discouragement. is comes from comparing yourself unfavorably
with your ideas about how you should be progressing. In addition to

88
rereading the section on Judging Your Progress, read some of the stories
in the eragatha and erigatha in the Pali Canon, which are available
at Dhammatalks.org, online. ese are verses of monks and nuns who
tell of their troubles in meditating before nally gaining awakening. Hold
in mind the perception that if they could overcome their problems—
which were often severe—you can overcome yours.
Also, don’t be embarrassed or afraid to give yourself pep talks as you
meditate. A “can-do” attitude is what makes all the diﬀerence, so
encourage the members of your committee that can provide that. It may
feel articial at rst—especially if the “can’t-do” members have long been
in charge of the discussion—but after a while you’ll start seeing results,
and positive attitudes won’t seem so articial anymore.
And always remember: A bad session of meditation is always better
than no meditation. With a bad session, there’s at least hope that you’ll
come to understand why it’s bad. With no meditation, there’s no hope at
all.
Worry & anxiety. ese restless emotions feed on the perception that
if you worry enough about the future, you’re better prepared for whatever
dangers it holds. at perception is foolish. Remind yourself that the
future is highly uncertain. You don’t know what dangers will come your
way, but you do know that strengthened mindfulness, alertness, and
discernment are the best preparation for any unexpected emergencies.
e best way to develop those qualities is to get back to the breath. en
try to breathe in as soothing a way as possible to counteract the irritated
breathing that was feeding the restlessness.
If you’re suﬀering from a sense of free-oating anxiety—ill-at-ease
without knowing why you’re feeling ill-at-ease—you may be suﬀering
from a vicious circle, with anxious feelings causing anxious breathing, and
anxious breathing feeding anxious feelings. Try breaking the circle by
very consciously and consistently breathing in a deep, soothing rhythm
that engages all the muscles in your abdomen, all the way down. With
the in-breath, breathe as deeply into the abdomen as you can, even to the

89
point where the breath feels a little too full. en let the breath out in a
smooth way. Relax all the muscles in your head and shoulders, so that the
abdomen is doing all the work. is rhythm may not feel comfortable at
rst, but it does cut the circle. After a few minutes, let the breath return
to a rhythm that feels more easeful. Keep this up as long as you can, and
the feelings of anxiety should grow weaker.
is deep abdominal breathing can also help relieve stress-induced
headaches.
Feelings of grief. If sorrow over the loss of a loved one—or of what
was a loving relationship—invades your meditation, the proper way to
deal with your grief depends on whether you’ve had the opportunity
elsewhere in your life to give enough expression to it. e sense of
“enough” here will vary from case to case, but if you genuinely feel that
you need to give more expression to your grief, nd an appropriate time
and place to do so. en, when you feel ready to meditate, make a resolve
to dedicate the merit of the meditation to the memory of the person
you’ve lost. e conviction that this is actually helpful to the other person
—wherever he or she may now be—allows you to benet from the inner
stability that meditation can provide you during times of need.
Healthy grieving is a complex process, for it requires recognizing what
was special about the other person and the relationship, but also
recognizing what’s not: the fact that it ended. Every relationship has to
end at some time or another. at’s the story of human life. You need to
build the inner strength that can allow you to maintain a sense of well-
being in spite of the inevitable losses that life throws at everyone. is is
one of the reasons why people meditate.
To nd this inner strength doesn’t mean that you’re being disloyal to
the other person or to the love you felt for that person. You’re showing
that you can be a stronger person for having had that relationship. For
many people, the diﬃcult part of grief lies in knowing when to focus less
on what was special about the relationship and more on what was not
special, without feeling disloyal. If you never make the shift, your grief

90
becomes self-indulgent and prevents you from being of use to yourself
and those you love. If you have trouble making the shift, talk it over with
someone whose judgment you trust.
Painful memories. If, while you’re meditating, your mind is
overwhelmed with the memory of someone who harmed you, remind
yourself that one of the best gifts you can give yourself is to forgive that
person. is doesn’t mean that you have to feel love for that person,
simply that you promise yourself not to seek revenge for what that person
did. You’re better oﬀ not trying to settle old scores, for scores in life—as
opposed to sports—never come to a nal tally. e wisest course is to
unburden yourself of the weight of resentment and cut the cycle of
retribution that would otherwise keep you ensnarled in an ugly back and
forth that could go on for years. Express a brief phrase of goodwill for the
person—“May you mend your ways and follow the path to true
happiness”—and then return to the breath.
If you have memories of people you’ve harmed, remember that
remorse doesn’t undo the harm you did, and it can actually weaken your
condence that you can change your ways. Simply remind yourself that
you never want to harm anyone ever again, and then spread goodwill to
the person you’ve harmed—wherever that person may be right now—
then to yourself, and then to all living beings.
inking of all living beings helps to remind you that you’re not the
only one who has harmed others in the past. We’ve all harmed one
another many times through innumerable lifetimes. However, this type
of thinking also reminds you that the opportunities for harm are many,
so you have to make the resolve to treat everyone with care. If you’re ever
going to get out of the cycle of harm in the world, you have to start with
your resolve not to engage in harm. You can’t wait for the resolve to start
in other people rst.
Finally, make a promise to yourself that you’ll dedicate the merit of
your meditation to people you’ve harmed. en return to the breath.

91
e same principle applies if you have memories of times when
someone needed your help but you didn’t give it. If the memory is of a
time when you couldn’t give help to someone who needed it, reread the
discussion of equanimity in Part One, section I.
Lust. Lust comes from focusing on the attractive perceptions you
build around a person or a relationship, and ignoring the unattractive
side. It gets aggravated by the type of breathing that habitually
accompanies your fantasies. So your approach has to be two-pronged.
• First, to weaken the voice that insists on some pleasure right now,
breathe in a way that relaxes any tension wherever you nd it in your
body. A good place to start is on the back of your hands.
• Second, introduce unattractive perceptions into your fantasies. If
you’re focusing on the attractiveness of the other person’s body, focus on
the unattractive parts right under the skin. If you’re focusing on an
attractive narrative about the relationship, visualize the other person
doing or saying something that really repels you. For instance, think
about the stupid or demeaning things you’ve done under the power of
lust, and visualize the other person laughing contemptuously about them
behind your back. If, however, contempt res you up, think about
something else that you know will turn you oﬀ. ink, for instance, of all
the strings that come with a sexual relationship, and how much better oﬀ
you are not getting entangled. en get back to the breath.
ese reections, by the way, are not just for monks or nuns.
Laypeople in a committed relationship need tools to keep their minds
from wandering outside of the relationship. And even within the
relationship, there are plenty of times when they need to keep lust under
control. And if you’re not in a committed relationship, you suﬀer if you
can’t turn oﬀ thoughts of lust at will. Society at large may extol and
encourage lust, but uncontrolled lust has done untold damage. at’s
why you need tools to counteract it, not only while meditating, but also
as you go through the day. Only when lust can be kept within bounds do
the good qualities that thrive in its absence have a chance to grow.

92
Romantic infatuation. is is a variant of lust in which you’re focused
less on the other person’s body and more on the stories you can
manufacture about how you and the other person will nd happiness and
understanding together. Remind yourself of how your romantic fantasies
in the past led to disappointment. Do you expect your current fantasies
to be any more reliable? Once you can see the danger of falling for these
fantasies, inject an element of reality into them to make them less
attractive. ink of the other person doing something that you nd really
disappointing, such as being unfaithful to you, until the act of fantasizing
no longer holds any appeal.
Anger. As with lust, you deal with anger rst by looking for where it
has created centers of tightness in your body. e chest and the stomach
are good places to start, as are the hands. Breathe in a way that releases
that tightness.
en try some perceptions that will counteract the anger. oughts of
goodwill are often recommended as the ideal antidote, but there are times
when you’re in no mood for thoughts of goodwill. So think about the
stupid things you do or say under the power of anger, and visualize the
person with whom you’re angry feeling satised to see you act stupidly.
Do you want to give that person that sort of satisfaction? is line of
thinking can often calm you down to the point where you can think more
clearly.
en reect on the fact that if you want everything to go the way you
like, you’re in the wrong realm. You’d have to be in heaven. But here
you’re in the human realm. Human history is lled with people doing
disagreeable things. So drop the perception that you or your loved ones
are being especially victimized. Mistreatment is a common thing, and
anger is not going to help you deal with it eﬀectively. You’ve got to clear
your head if you want your response to injustice to have a good eﬀect. So
try to develop some equanimity around the fact that injustice is universal,
and then see what you can do most eﬀectively in response to this
particular instance of it.

93
Another strategy is to think of whatever goodness has been done by
the people you’re angry at. It’s rare that people have no goodness to them
at all. If you refuse to see that goodness, you can’t trust yourself to act in
skillful ways around those people, and your own heart becomes dry.
A traditional image for this strategy is that you’re crossing a desert—
hot, tired, and trembling with thirst—and you come across a little water
in a cow’s footprint. If you were to scoop it up with your hand, you’d
muddy the water. So you do what you have to do: Get down on all fours
and slurp up the water directly from the footprint. Your posture while
doing this may not look very dignied, but this is not a time to worry
about how you look. You’ve got to give top priority to your survival. In
the same way, if you feel that it’s beneath you to look for the goodness
done by someone you’re angry at, you deprive yourself of the water you
need to keep your own goodness alive. So try looking for that goodness,
to see if it makes it easier to develop thoughts of goodwill. And
remember: It’s for your own sake as much as for theirs.
If you can’t think of any goodness done by the people you’re angry at,
then take pity on them: ey’re digging themselves into a deep hole.
Jealousy. Jealousy is a particular type of anger that comes when other
people experience good fortune at what you see is your expense—as
when a colleague at work gets praise that you feel you deserve, or when a
person you’re infatuated with falls in love with someone else. In addition
to the anger, jealousy adds perceptions of disappointment and wounded
pride. In every case it comes from pinning your hopes for happiness on
something under someone else’s control.
One way of dealing with jealousy is to remind yourself that you’re
going to be a slave to it as long as you keep dening your happiness and
sense of self-worth by things outside your control. Isn’t it time to
seriously start looking for happiness inside instead? You can also ask
yourself if you want to hoard all the happiness and good fortune in the
world for yourself. If so, what kind of person are you? If there have been
times in the past when you’ve enjoyed making other people jealous,

94
remind yourself that the jealousy you’re currently experiencing is the
inevitable payback. Isn’t it time to get out of that vicious cycle?
Perhaps one of the most useful perceptions in dealing with jealousy is
to step back and take a larger view of life and the world as a whole, to
gain a sense of how petty the things you’re jealous about really are. ink
of the Buddha’s vision of the human world: people oundering like sh in
small puddles, ghting over water that is drying up. Is it worth your
while to keep ghting over things that are petty and diminishing, or
would you rather nd a better source of happiness?
After thinking in these ways, take some time to develop the sublime
attitude of equanimity and—if you’re feeling up for it—throw in a little
empathetic joy as well.
Impatience. When the practice isn’t giving results as fast as you’d
desire, remember that the problem isn’t with the desire per se. You’ve
simply focused it on the wrong place: on the results rather than on the
causes that will produce those results. It’s like driving a car to a mountain
on the horizon. If you spend all your time looking at the mountain, you’ll
drive oﬀ the road. You have to focus your attention on the road and
follow it each inch along the way. at will take you to the mountain.
So when you’re feeling impatient with the meditation, remember that
you have to focus your desire on staying with the breath, on being
mindful and alert, and on all the other parts of the practice that count as
causes. If you focus your desire on developing the causes well, the results
will have to come.
If impatience comes from a desire to get past the meditation so that
you can get on with the rest of your life, remember that the rest of your
life has left your mind in need of some healing medicine. Meditation is
just that medicine, like the cream you’d rub on a rash. You can’t just rub
the cream on and then wash it oﬀ. You have to let it stay there so that it
can do its healing work. In the same way, you have to give the breath and
all the skillful qualities that you’re developing around it time to do their
work.

95
And remember that meditation is not something you “get past.” Just as
your body will need medicine as long as it’s exposed to the ravages of the
world, your mind will need the healing medicine of meditation as long as
you live.
Doubt. is emotion comes in two forms: doubt about yourself,
which is covered under Discouragement, above; and doubt about the
practice. is latter doubt can be overcome in two ways.
• e rst is to read about the example of the Buddha and his noble
disciples. ey were (and are) people of wisdom and integrity. ey
taught for free. ey had no reason to misrepresent the truth to anyone.
It’s rare to nd teachers like that in the world, so you should give them
the benet of the doubt.
• e second way is to remind yourself that the practice can be truly
judged only by a person who is true. Are you true in sticking with the
breath? Are you true in observing when your mind is acting in skillful
ways and when it’s not? Could you be more true in these areas? You’ll be
able to overcome your doubt only if you’re truly observant and give the
teachings a truly fair and earnest try, pushing yourself beyond your
normal limits. Regardless of whether the practice ultimately will pan out
to be true, you can only gain by learning to be more observant and
earnest, so the energy you put into developing these qualities is sure not
to be a waste.
VISIONS & OTHER UNCANNY PHENOMENA
When the mind starts to quiet down, unusual intuitions can
sometimes appear: visions, voices, and other uncanny phenomena.
Sometimes they convey true information; sometimes false. e true
information is especially dangerous, because it leads you to trust
whatever pops into your mind, so that you start falling for the things that
are false. Intuitions of this sort can also lead to strong conceit, as you
begin to feel that you’re somehow special. is pulls you far oﬀ the path.

96
For this reason, the general rule of thumb with regard to these things
is to leave them be. Remember: Not everything that arises in a still mind is
trustworthy. So don’t feel that you’re missing out on something important
if you don’t get involved with these things. Only if you’re under the
personal supervision of a teacher who is skilled in handling them should
you risk getting involved. e best information a book like this can oﬀer
is on how to pull yourself out of them. For instance:
Signs. Sometimes when the mind settles down, a light may appear to
the mind, or you may hear a high-pitched sound in your ears. Or there
may be an unusual sensation related to any of your other senses: a smell,
a taste, a tactile sensation. If this happens, don’t leave the breath. ese
are simply signs that you’re settling down, so regard them as you would
signs on the side of a road. When you see a sign that you’re entering a
city, you don’t leave the road to drive on the sign. You stay on the road,
and that will get you further into the city.
Visions. As the mind begins to settle down—or if it leaves the breath
in a lapse of mindfulness—you may see a vision of yourself, another
person, or another place in space or time. ese come to the mind when
it’s quiet but not fully established in its object. To get rid of them,
reestablish mindfulness by breathing deeply into the heart three or four
times, and they’ll go away. If the vision is of another person, rst spread
goodwill to that person, and then breathe deeply into the heart to let the
vision disband.
A sense of having left the body. If you sense that you’re outside your
body, you may feel tempted to travel around a bit on the astral plane, but
you should resist the temptation. ere are dangers there, and meanwhile
you’re leaving your body unprotected. You can get back into the body by
calling to mind the four basic properties that make up your sense of the
body as felt from within: the breath energy, warmth, coolness, and
solidity (see the discussion of the Fourth Jhana, in Part Four).
External presences. If you sense an energy or unbodied presence
outside your body, you don’t have to gure out who it is or what’s causing

97
it. Simply ll your own body with awareness and breath energy. ink of
both your awareness and your breath energy as being solid and
impenetrable, from the top of the head to the tips of your ngers and
toes. When you’ve secured your body in this way, you can spread
thoughts of goodwill in the direction of the external presence and then in
all directions. Keep this up until the sense of the external presence goes
away.
GETTING STUCK ON CONCENTRATION
ere are two types of attachment to concentration: healthy and
unhealthy. Healthy attachment to concentration is a necessary element in
developing it as a skill. With this kind of attachment you try to maintain
your inner stillness in all situations as you fulll your other
responsibilities throughout the day. You take an interest in guring out
why you can’t maintain it in some situations, and try to nd free time to
devote to more formal practice, even if it’s only little meditation breaks
throughout the day. e reason this attachment is healthy is because it
helps you to recognize any unhealthy attachment as a problem to be
solved, and it gives you a good home base from which to solve it.
With unhealthy attachment to concentration, you don’t want to leave
formal practice at all, don’t want to engage with other people at all, and
don’t want to fulll your responsibilities in the world, for you see that the
world is nothing but a disturbance to your peace of mind. You simply
want to use the concentration as an excuse to run away from your
responsibilities in the world.
You have to remember that your responsibilities are important
opportunities for you to develop the good qualities you’ll need to train
the mind in discernment: Patience. Persistence. Equanimity. Also, the
turmoil you sense in dealing with the world doesn’t come from the world;
it comes from within your own mind. If you simply hide out in
concentration, you’ll curl up around the sources of your inner turmoil
and never be able to uproot them. Eventually, they’ll destroy your
concentration and you won’t have anything to hold onto at all.

98
RANDOM INSIGHTS
If an insight suddenly pops into your head while you’re meditating,
you have to decide quickly whether it’s something worth paying attention
to or simply another distraction. A quick rule of thumb is this: If the
insight can be applied directly to what you’re doing right then and there
in your meditation, go ahead and give it a try. See how it works. If it
doesn’t work, drop it. If it doesn’t apply directly to what you’re doing,
drop it. Don’t be afraid that you’ll lose something valuable. If you try to
hold onto it, it’ll lead you further and further away from the breath. If it’s
really valuable, it’ll stick in your mind without your trying to remember
it.
ink of concentration as a goose that lays golden eggs. If you spend
all your time gathering and storing the eggs, the goose will die from lack
of attention. And the gold of these eggs is like the gold in most fairy tales:
If you don’t put it to good use right away, it’ll turn into feathers and
ashes. So if the egg can’t be used right away, discard it. Put your energy
into looking after the goose.
is is another area where it’s important to remember: Not everything
that pops into a quiet mind is reliable. Quieting the mind gives you access
to many rooms in the mind that you might have closed oﬀ in the past,
but just because the rooms are now open doesn’t mean that they all
contain valuables. Some of them hold nothing but old junk.
If an insight that you put aside during the meditation still comes to
mind after your meditation, ask yourself how it applies to the way you
conduct your life. If it seems to oﬀer a wise perspective on how to act in a
particular situation, you might give it a try to see if it really is helpful.
Also, to make sure you don’t get taken in by a one-sided insight, ask
yourself: To what extent is the opposite true? is is one of the most
important questions to keep on hand to maintain your balance as a
meditator.
If the insight is of a more abstract sort—about the meaning of the
universe or whatever—let it go. Remember that the questions of

99
discernment deal not with abstractions but with actions. Your actions.
e insights you’re looking for in your meditation are those dealing with
your actions as well.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
On dealing with pain: Ajaan MahaBoowa Ñanasampanno – Straight
from the Heart, in particular the talks, “Feelings of Pain” and
“Investigating Pain”
e talk, “A Good Dose of Dhamma,” in Upasika Kee Nanayon, An
Unentangled Knowing, also gives good pointers on dealing with pain and
illness.
On having the right attitude toward mistakes: “How to Fall” in
Meditations
Meditations5 contains many talks on ways of dealing with disruptive
emotions.
On the uses of gratitude as a theme of contemplation: “e Lessons of
Gratitude” in Head & Heart Together
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):
2012/5/23: Pain is Not the Enemy   (read)
2012/7/31: Pleasure & Pain   (read)
2010/6/5: Insight into Pain   (read)
2012/11/22: Take the One Seat   (read)
2012/1/1: Strengthening Conviction   (read)
2010/3/23: Perceptions of the Breath   (read)
2009/11/9: e Power of Perception   (read)
2008/2/3: Judging Your Meditation   (read)
2008/2/6: Good & Bad Meditation   (read)
2012/1/12: Evaluating Your Practice   (read)
2010/11/28: Measuring Progress   (read)
2010/11/19: Delusion Concentration   (read)

100
2003/1: No Mistakes Are Fatal   (read)
2009/10/3: Ups & Downs   (read)
2009/7/26: Patience & Urgency   (read)
2012/8/10: Fabricating with Awareness   (read)
2012/8/17: e Arrow in the Heart   (read)
2004/11/24: Unskillful inking   (read)
2011/4/14: Unlearning Unskillful Behavior   (read)
2010/4/21: e Arrows of Emotion   (read)
2012/7/22: A Refuge from Illness, Aging, & Death   (read)
2011/1/30: Sober Up   (read)
2011/10/20: In the Mood   (read)
2011/8/15: Today is Better than Yesterday   (read)
2010/12/7: Get Out of the Way   (read)
2010/12/13: Antidotes   (read)
2010/11/11: Sorting Yourselves Out   (read)
2005/3/9: Purity of Heart   (read)
2012/7/25: Feeding on the Breath   (read)
2012/7/27: Practicing from Gratitude   (read)

101
PA R T  T H R E E
Meditation in Daily Life
ere are two main reasons for extending meditation practice into
daily life. e rst is that you create a momentum that carries through
from one session of formal practice to the next. If you chop up your life
into times when you meditate and times when you don’t, the energy built
up with each meditation session dissipates in the interim. Each time you
sit down to meditate, you have to start again from scratch.
It’s like keeping a dog on a leash. If the dog is left on a long leash, it
tends to get the leash wound around all sorts of things: lampposts, trees,
people’s legs. You’re faced with the long, laborious process of untangling
the leash to bring both the dog and the leash back to where you are. But
if the dog’s on a short leash, then when you sit down, the dog and the
leash are right there. In the same way, if you try to maintain the center of
your meditation throughout the day, then when the time comes to sit
down in meditation, you’re already in your center. You can continue from
there.
e second reason for extending meditation practice into daily life is
that it allows you to bring the skills you’ve developed in the meditation to
bear right where they’re most needed: the mind’s tendency to create stress
and suﬀering for itself throughout the day.
Having a sense of your center as a safe, comfortable place helps keep
you grounded in the midst of the turmoil of daily life. You’re not blown
away by outside events, for you have a solid basis inside. It’s like having a
post at a rocky beach at the edge of a sea. If the post is simply left lying on
the beach, the waves will drive it back and forth. It will be a danger to
anyone who plays in the waves. Eventually, the waves will ram the post
against the rocks and smash it to smithereens. But if the post is set

102
upright and driven deep into bedrock, the waves won’t be able to move it.
It’ll stay safe and sound, and pose no danger to anyone at all.
Some people complain that trying to practice meditation in the midst
of daily life simply adds one more task to the many tasks they’re already
trying to juggle, but don’t see it in that way. Meditation gives you a solid
place to stand so that you can juggle your other responsibilities with
more ease and nesse. As many meditators will tell you, the more
mindfulness and alertness you bring to your responsibilities, the better
your performance. Instead of interfering with your work, the meditation
makes you more attentive and alert in doing it. e fact that you’re
staying focused, instead of letting the mind wander all over the place,
helps to husband your energy, so that you can bring more stamina to
whatever you have to do.
At the same time, having a clear sense of a still center helps you to see
movements of the mind you otherwise would have missed. It’s like lying
on your back in the middle of a eld. If you look up at the sky without
reference to anything on the ground, you can’t tell how fast the clouds are
moving, or in which direction. But if you have a still point of reference—
the top of a roof or a tall pole—you can clearly sense the clouds’ direction
and speed. In the same way, when you have a still point of reference, you
can sense when the mind is heading in the wrong direction and can bring
it back before it gets into trouble.
Meditation in daily life is essentially a more complicated version of
walking meditation, in that you’re dealing with three main areas of focus:
(1) maintaining your inner focus (2) while engaged in activities (3) in the
midst of the activities around you. e main diﬀerences of course are that
(2) and (3) are more complex and less under your control. But there are
ways to compensate for the added complexity. And you can use what
measure of control you do have over your actions and your environment
to create better conditions for your practice. All too often people try to
push meditation into the cracks of their life as they’re already living it,
which doesn’t give the meditation much room to grow. If you’re really

103
serious about treating the problem of suﬀering and stress, you have to
rearrange your life as best you can to foster the skills you want to develop.
Place the training of your mind high in your list of priorities in
everything you do. e higher you can place it, the better.
As I stated in the Introduction, some of the advice given here in Part
ree may assume a greater level of commitment than you’re currently
ready to make. So read selectively—but also in a spirit of self-honesty.
Try to be clear about which members of your inner committee are
making the selection.
I : YOUR INNER FOCUS
You may nd that you can’t keep clear watch on the in-and-out breath
when you’re deeply involved in a complicated task, but you can maintain
a general sense of the quality of the breath energy in the body.
is is an area where lessons you’ve learned from sitting meditation
can be of help. Two skills in particular are helpful here.
1. Try to notice where the trigger points are in your breath energy
eld: the points that tend to tense up or tighten most quickly, leading to
patterns of tension spreading into other parts of the body. Typical points
are at the throat; around the heart; at the solar plexus, right in front of
the stomach; or the backs of your hands or the tops of your feet.
Once you’ve identied a point of this sort, use that as the spot where
you center your attention throughout the day. Make sure above all that
the spot stays open and relaxed. If you do sense that it’s tightened up,
stop whatever else you’re doing for a moment and breathe through it. In
other words, send good breath energy into that area and allow it to relax
as soon as you can. at will help disperse the power of the tension
before it takes over other parts of your body and mind.
In the beginning, you may nd yourself wandering away from your
spot more than you’re staying with it. As with the sitting meditation, you
have to be patient but rm with yourself. Each time you realize that
you’ve lost your spot, come right back to it and release any tension that’s

104
developed in the meantime. You might nd it useful to set reminders for
yourself: for instance, that you’ll make a special eﬀort to be in your spot
each time you cross a road or come to a red light. Over time, you can set
your goals higher and aim at longer stretches of time where you’re
centered and relaxed.
You’ll be ghting some old subconscious defensive habits as you do
this, so it may take time to master this skill. But if you persist in keeping
your spot relaxed, you’ll nd that you carry less tension throughout the
day. You’ll be less burdened with the sense that you’ve got something you
need to get out of your system. At the same time, you’ll gain more
enjoyment out of trying to maintain your center because you feel more
stable and at ease. is helps to keep you with it. If you nd yourself in a
situation where you’re simply sitting with nothing much to do—as in a
meeting or a doctor’s waiting room—you can bliss out on the feeling of
ease in your center, and no one else will have to know.
Keeping your center spot relaxed also helps make you more sensitive
to the little things that trigger you. is gives you more insight into the
workings of your own mind. You gain a place where you can step back
from your thoughts and watch them simply as members of the
committee. You don’t have to take up everything the committee proposes.
If something unskillful is brought to the oor, you learn to recognize it as
unskillful and breathe right through it.
As you strengthen your ability to keep your center spot relaxed and
full in all situations, you’re developing a foundation for your inner
observer. Developing this identity in the mind helps you to go through
the day with less emotional expense, and to notice things in yourself and
in your surroundings that you never noticed before. In other words, it’s a
good foundation for discernment to arise in the course of your daily
activities. It also strengthens the discernment you bring to your formal
meditation.
2. e second useful breath-skill as you go through the day is to ll
your body with breath and awareness when you’re in a diﬃcult situation,

105
and especially when you’re confronted with a diﬃcult person. ink of
the breath as a protective shield, so that the other person’s energy doesn’t
penetrate yours. At the same time, visualize that person’s words and
actions as going past you, and not as coming straight at you. is helps
you feel less threatened, and enables you to think more clearly about how
to respond in an appropriate way. And because you’re creating a force
eld of good solid energy, you might have a calming and stabilizing eﬀect
on the people and the situation around you.
is is also a good skill to master when you’re dealing with people
who come to tell you their troubles. All too often, we subconsciously feel
that if we don’t absorb some of their pain, we’re not being empathetic.
But our sense of absorbing their energy doesn’t really lighten their load; it
simply weighs us down. You can still be empathetic—and even see their
problems more clearly—if you stay inside a clear cocoon of good breath
energy. at way you don’t confuse their pain with yours.
Ideally, you want to combine these two breath-skills into one, as you
would in walking meditation. In other words, keep your focus on your
chosen spot as your default mode, but learn how to expand the breath
and the awareness from that spot to ll the whole body as quickly as
possible whenever you feel the need. at way you’re prepared for
whatever comes up in the course of the day.
II : YOUR ACTIVITIES
You’ll quickly discover that the things disturbing your meditation in
daily life don’t all come from outside. Your own activities—what you do,
say, and think—can also throw you oﬀ-balance. is is why the principle
of restraint is an essential part of the practice: You make a point of
refraining from doing things and directing your attention in ways that
will undo the work of your meditation.
It’s important not to think of restraint as connement, restricting the
range of your activities. Actually, it’s a door to freedom—freedom from
the damage you do to yourself and the people around you. Although

106
some of the traditional forms of restraint may seem conning at rst,
remember that only the unskillful members of the committee are feeling
hemmed in. e skillful ones who have been trampled underfoot are
actually being given some space and freedom to develop and grow.
At the same time, the practice of restraint doesn’t mean restricting the
range of your awareness. All too often, when we think of doing
something or looking at something, we focus simply on what we like or
dislike. Restraint forces you to look at why you like or dislike things, and
at what happens as a result when you follow your likes and dislikes. In this
way, you broaden your perspective and gain insight into areas of the mind
that otherwise would stay hidden behind the scenes. Restraint is thus a
way of developing discernment.
Some members of the mind’s committee like to argue that you’ll
understand them only when you give in to them, and that if you don’t
give in to them, they’ll go underground where you can’t see them. If you
fall for that argument, you’ll never be free of their inuence. e only
way around it is to be persistent in refusing to believe it, for then you get
to see their next line of defense, and then the next. Finally you’ll come to
the level where they reveal themselves, and you’ll see how weak their
reasoning really is. So here again, restraint is a way of developing
discernment into areas that indulgence keeps hidden.
Another way of thinking about restraint is to regard meditation as an
exercise in developing a home for the mind—a place inside where you
can rest with a sense of protection and gather nourishment for the mind.
If you lack restraint, it’s as if the windows and doors of your inner home
were open 24 hours a day. People and animals can come and go and leave
whatever mess they want. If you close your windows and doors only
when you practice formal meditation, you get forced into the role of a
janitor each time you start to meditate. And you’ll nd that some of the
people or animals that have wandered into your home won’t be willing to
leave. ey’ll eat up all the nourishment you’ve gathered, and you won’t
have any left for yourself. So you have to gain a sense of discernment as

107
to when you should open and close your windows and doors. at way
your mind will have a good home.
If you’re afraid that restraint will deprive you of your spontaneity,
remember the harm that untrained spontaneity can cause. ink of the
things that you said or did on the spur of the moment that you then
regretted for a long time afterwards. What you thought was your “natural
spontaneity” was simply the force of an unskillful habit, as articial and
contrived as any other habit. Spontaneity becomes admirable and “in the
zone” only when it has been trained to the point where skillful action
becomes eﬀortless. is is what we admire in the greatest artists,
performers, and sports stars. eir spontaneity required years of training.
So look at restraint as a way of training your spontaneity to become
eﬀortlessly skillful. is may take time, but it’s time well spent.
ere are three traditional ways of exercising restraint: developing a
sense of moderation in your conversation, following precepts, and
exercising restraint over your senses.
Moderation in Conversation
Lesson number one in meditation is keeping control of your mouth. If
you can’t control your mouth there’s no way you’re going to control your
mind.
So, before you say anything, ask yourself: (1) “Is this true?” (2) “Is this
benecial?” (3) “Is this the right time to say this?” If the answer to all
three questions is Yes, then go ahead and say it. If not, then keep quiet.
When you make a habit of asking yourself these questions, you nd
that very little conversation is really worthwhile.
is doesn’t mean that you have to become unsociable. If you’re at
work and you need to talk to your fellow workers to create a harmonious
atmosphere in the workplace, that counts as worthwhile speech. Just be
careful that social-grease speech doesn’t go beyond that and turn into idle
chatter. is is not only a waste of energy but also a source of danger.
Too much grease can gum up the works. Often the words that cause the

108
most harm are those that, when they pop into the mind, are allowed to
go unltered right out the mouth.
If observing the principle of moderation in conversation means that
you gain a reputation for being a quiet person, well, that’s ne. You nd
that your words, if you’re more careful about doling them out, start
taking on more worth. At the same time, you’re creating a better
atmosphere for your mind. If you’re constantly chattering all day long,
how are you going to stop the mental chatter when you sit down to
meditate? But if you develop the habit of watching over your mouth, the
same habit comes to apply to the meditation. Your committee members
all start learning to watch over their mouths as well.
is doesn’t mean that you have to give up humor, just that you learn
to employ humor wisely. Humor in our society tends to fall into the
categories of wrong speech: falsehoods, divisive speech, coarse speech,
and idle chatter. ere’s a challenge in learning to use your humor to state
things that are true, that lead to harmony, and actually serve a good
purpose. But think for a moment of all the great humorists of the past:
We remember their humor because of the clever ways they expressed the
truth. You may or may not aspire to be a great humorist, but the eﬀort
spent in trying to use humor wisely is a good exercise in discernment. If
you can learn to laugh wisely and in a good-natured way about the foibles
of the world around you, you can learn to laugh in the same way at your
own foibles. And that’s one of the most essential skills in any meditator’s
repertoire.
Precepts
A precept is a promise you make to yourself to avoid harmful
behavior. No one is forcing it on you, but wise people have found that
ve precepts in particular are very helpful in creating a good environment
for training the mind. When you take on these ve precepts, you
establish the resolve not to intentionally engage in ve activities:
1) Killing any person or animal

109
2) Stealing (i.e., taking something belonging to someone else
without that person’s permission)
3) Having illicit sex (i.e., with a minor or with an adult who is
already in another relationship or when you are already in another
relationship)
4) Telling falsehoods (i.e., misrepresenting the truth)
5) Taking intoxicants
ese precepts are designed to counteract some of the blatant ways in
which your actions create disturbances, inside and out, that make it
diﬃcult to maintain your inner focus. Outside, they protect you from the
sorts of actions that will lead to retaliation from others. Inside, they
protect you from the two attitudes with which you can wound yourself
when you know you’ve harmed yourself or others: low self-esteem or
defensively high self-esteem.
ese two forms of unhealthy self-esteem relate to the two ways
people tend to react to their own misbehavior: You either (1) regret the
actions or (2) engage in one of two kinds of denial, either (a) denying
that your actions did in fact happen or (b) denying that they really were
wrong. ese reactions are like wounds in the mind. Regret is an open
wound, tender to the touch, whereas denial is like hardened, twisted scar
tissue around a tender spot. When the mind is wounded in these ways, it
can’t settle down comfortably in the present, for it nds itself resting on
raw, exposed esh or calcied knots. When it’s forced to stay in the
present, it’s there only in a tensed, contorted, and partial way. e
insights it gains tend to be contorted and partial as well. Only if the mind
is free of wounds and scars can it settle down comfortably and freely in
the present, and give rise to undistorted discernment.
is is where the ve precepts come in: ey’re designed to heal these
wounds and scars. ey’re an integral part of the healing process of
meditation. Healthy self-esteem comes from living up to a set of
standards that are practical, clear-cut, humane, and worthy of respect.

110
e ve precepts are formulated in such a way that they provide just such
a set of standards.
• Practical: e standards set by the precepts are simple. You promise
yourself not to engage intentionally in any of the ve kinds of harmful
activities, and not to tell anyone else to engage in them, either. at’s all.
You don’t have to worry about controlling more than that. is means
that the precepts don’t require you to focus on indirect or unintended
ways in which your actions may lead to someone else’s breaking the
precepts. You focus rst on your own choices to act.
If, after time, you want to expand your promises to yourself to avoid
behavior that might indirectly cause others to break the precepts—such
as buying meat—that’s entirely up to you. But in the beginning, it’s wisest
to focus on what you yourself choose to do, for that’s an area where you
can exert true control.
It’s entirely possible to live in line with these standards—not always
easy or convenient, maybe, but always possible. Some of the precepts may
be easier for you to keep than others, but with time and patience—and a
little wisdom in dealing with lapses in your behavior—they become more
and more manageable. is is especially true when you start noticing the
benets that come from keeping them, and the harm that’s caused when
you lapse.
Some people translate the precepts into standards that sound more
lofty or noble—taking the second precept, for example, to mean no abuse
of the planet’s resources—but even those who reformulate the precepts in
this way admit that it’s impossible to live up to them. Anyone who has
suﬀered from having to live up to impossible standards can tell you of the
psychological damage such standards can cause. If you can give yourself
standards that take a little eﬀort and mindfulness but are possible to
meet, your self-esteem soars dramatically as you discover within yourself
the ability to meet those standards. You can then face more demanding
tasks with condence.

111
• Clear-cut: e precepts are formulated with no ifs, ands, or buts.
is means that they give very clear guidance, with no room for waﬄing
or less-than-honest rationalizations. An action either ts in with the
precepts or it doesn’t. Again, standards of this sort are very healthy to live
by. Anyone who has raised children has found that, although children
may complain about hard and fast rules, they actually feel more secure
with them than with rules that are vague and always open to negotiation.
Clear-cut rules don’t allow for unspoken agendas to come sneaking in the
back door of the mind. When, through training yourself in rules like this,
you learn that you can trust your motivations, you gain a genuinely
healthy sense of self-esteem. At the same time, holding to a clear-cut rule
saves you the time you might otherwise waste in trying to blur the line
and justify unskillful behavior to yourself.
• Humane: e precepts are humane both to the person who observes
them and to the people aﬀected by his or her actions. If you observe
them, you’re aligning yourself with a humane principle: that the most
important powers shaping your experience of the world are the
intentional thoughts, words, and deeds you choose in the present
moment. is means that you are not insignicant. With every choice
you make—at home, at work, at play—you are exercising your power in
the ongoing fashioning of the world. Keeping the precepts ensures that
your contribution to the world is always positive.
As for your eﬀect on other people: If you follow the precepts, your
contribution to the world is in line with the principles of goodwill and
compassion. is helps you to develop the brahmaviharas with no fear of
hypocrisy or denial.
• Worthy of respect: e ve precepts are called “standards appealing to
the noble ones”—people who have gained at least the rst taste of
awakening. Such people don’t accept standards simply on the basis of
popularity. ey’ve put their lives on the line to see what leads to true
happiness and have seen for themselves, for example, that all lying is
pathological, and that sex in violation of a committed relationship is

112
unsafe at any speed. Other people may not respect you for living by the
ve precepts, but noble ones do, and their respect is worth more than
that of anyone else in the world.
Some people are afraid of keeping the precepts for fear of becoming
proud that their behavior is better than other people’s. is sort of pride,
however, is easy to drop when you remember that you’re observing the
precepts not to make yourself better than others, but simply to cure the
problems in your own mind. It’s like taking medicine: If you take your
medicine when other people are not taking theirs, that’s no reason to look
down on them. You may encourage them to take their health more
seriously, but if they refuse to heed your encouragement, you have to
drop the matter for the time being and concentrate on recovering your
own health.
e healthy sort of pride that comes from observing the precepts
focuses on comparing yourself with yourself—in other words, on the fact
that you’ve learned how to be less harmful and more thoughtful than you
used to be. is sort of pride is much better than the opposite sort: the
conceit that views the precepts as petty, claiming to be above them. at
sort of pride is doubly damaging: both to your mind and to the happiness
of others. It’s much healthier to respect yourself for submitting to a strict
training and mastering it. at sort of respect is good for you and for
everyone else.
In addition to creating a healthy attitude and peaceful environment
conducive to the practice, the precepts exercise many of the skills you
need to get started in meditation. ey give you practice in setting up a
skillful intention and then sticking with it. ey also give you practice in
dealing in a mature way with any lapses that may occur. To keep to them
successfully, you have to learn how to recognize and acknowledge a
mistake without getting tied up in remorse and self-recrimination. You
simply reaﬃrm your intention not to make that slip again, and then
develop the brahmaviharas to help strengthen that intention. is way

113
you learn both how to take your mistakes in stride and how not to repeat
them.
e precepts also develop the mental qualities needed specically for
concentration: mindfulness to keep them in mind, alertness to keep watch
over your actions to make sure that they stay in line with your precepts,
and ardency to anticipate situations where you might be tempted to break
your precepts, so that you can plan a skillful strategy that will keep your
precepts intact. is then develops your discernment.
For example, there will be situations where telling the truth about a
particular topic might be harmful to others. How do you avoid talking
about that topic and yet still not tell a lie? When you promise yourself
not to kill, you have to anticipate that pests may invade your home. How
can you keep them out without killing them?
In these ways, the precepts help to foster a conducive environment
around the practice of meditation, at the same time exercising skills you
need to develop within the meditation itself.
Restraint of the Senses
e senses here are six: your senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and
touch, along with the sense of ideation—your mind’s knowledge of ideas.
Restraint of these senses doesn’t mean going around with blinders on
your eyes or plugs in your ears. It actually forces you to see more than you
normally might, for it requires you to become sensitive to two things: (1)
your motivation for, say, looking at a particular sight; and (2) what’s
happening to your mind as a result of looking at that sight. In this way
you bring the questions of discernment to bear in an area where you’re
usually driven by the questions of hunger: the search to see or hear
delicious things. You learn to view your engagement with the senses as
part of a causal process. is is how restraint helps to develop
discernment. At the same time, you learn to counteract causal currents
that would disturb the mind. is helps to develop concentration.

114
To resist getting swept away by these currents, you have to maintain
your center of awareness within the body. at type of center is like an
anchor for securing the mind. en make sure that your center is
comfortable. at keeps the mind well fed, so that it doesn’t abandon its
anchor to ow along with those currents in search of food. When the
mind isn’t hungry for pleasure, it’ll be much more willing to exercise
restraint over the currents going out the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body,
and mind. Once the mind is rmly centered, you’re in a good position to
step out of the currents and view them in terms of both aspects of their
causal patterns.
1. Each time you direct your attention to the senses, try to be clear
about your motivation. Realize that you’re not a passive receiver of sights,
sounds, etc. e mind actually goes out looking for sensory stimuli. And
often it’s looking for trouble. ere are times, for instance, when there’s
nothing in your surroundings to inspire lust, but lust arises in the mind
and goes looking for something to nourish itself. e same thing happens
with anger and all your other emotions.
So when you look at things, what are you looking for? Who’s doing
the looking? Is lust doing the looking? Is anger doing the looking? If you
let these emotions direct your eyes, they get used to ordering your mind
around as well. You’re strengthening the very committee members that
you’ll later need to wrestle down during the meditation.
If you see that unskillful intentions are directing where you focus your
attention or how you look at something, change your focus. Look at
something else, or look at the same thing in a diﬀerent way. If you’ve been
contemplating a beautiful body, look for the aspects that aren’t so
beautiful—and they aren’t far away, just under the skin. e same
principle holds for anger. If you’re thinking about someone you really
hate, remember that there’s another side to that person as well, a good
side. Be a person with two eyes, and not just one. Or if you nd that
when you drop the lust or the anger, you’re no longer interested in
looking at or thinking about those people, you realize that the problem

115
wasn’t with them. It was with the committee in your mind. You learn that
you can’t really trust some of its members. is is a good lesson to learn
on a daily basis.
2. A similar principle applies when you take note of the results of your
looking. If you realize that the way you’ve been looking at something has
started to aggravate unskillful mental states, either look away or learn to
look at the same thing in a way that counteracts those mental states. e
same applies to what you listen to, what you smell, what you taste, what
you touch, and especially what you think about.
If you can keep your attention focused on the way in which the mind
initiates sensory contact and is aﬀected by sensory contact, you’re staying
focused inside even as you look or listen outside. is helps to keep the
center of your focus rm and resilient throughout the day.
III : YOUR SURROUNDINGS
e values of human society, for the most part, y right in the face of a
meditative life. Either they make fun of the idea of a true, unchanging
happiness, or they avoid the topic entirely, or else they say that you can’t
reach an unchanging happiness through your own eﬀorts. is is true
even in societies that have traditionally been Buddhist, and it’s especially
so in modern society, where the media exert pressure to look for
happiness in things that will change. e practice of meditation for the
sake of an unconditioned happiness is always counter-cultural. No one
else is going to protect your conviction in the possibility of true
happiness. You have to protect it yourself. So learn how to skillfully
shelter your practice from the conicting values of society at large.
ere are three basic ways in which you can do this: choosing
admirable friends, learning to live frugally, and nding seclusion as much
as you can.
ese three issues require a fair amount of renunciation, and
renunciation is easiest when you regard it not as deprivation but as a
trade. In trading the pleasures of an ordinary life for a meditative life,

116
you’re trading candy for gold. Or you may think of yourself as an athlete
in training. e game of outwitting your unskillful habits is far more
worthwhile than any sport. Just as athletes are willing to live under
certain restrictions for the sake of their performance, you should be
willing to live under certain restrictions for the sake of true happiness.
And just as an athlete restricted to a healthy diet comes to prefer healthy
food to junk food, you often nd that the restrictions you place on the
way you interact with your surroundings actually become your preferred
mode of being.
Admirable Friends
When you associate with a person, you unconsciously pick up that
person’s habits and views. is is why the most important principle in
shaping the environment around your daily meditation is to associate
with admirable people.
Admirable people have four qualities: ey’re virtuous, generous,
wise, and have conviction in the principle that skillful qualities should be
developed, and unskillful qualities abandoned. If you can nd people like
this, try to associate with them. Notice their good qualities, try to
emulate them, and ask them how you might develop more virtue,
generosity, wisdom, and conviction yourself.
So look around you. If you don’t see any people like this, search them
out.
e problem is, what to do with the people around you who aren’t
admirable, but with whom you have to spend time at home, at work, or
at social occasions. is issue is especially diﬃcult if they’re people for
whom you’re responsible, or to whom you have debts of gratitude, such
as your parents. You have to spend time with these people; you have to
help them. So learn what it means to spend time with people without
associating with them—i.e., without picking up their habits and values.
e primary principle is that you don’t go to them for advice on moral or
spiritual issues. Also, try to excuse yourself every time they try to pull
you into activities that go against your precepts or principles. If the

117
activities are unavoidable—as when there’s a party at work—take the
attitude of being an anthropologist from Mars, observing the strange
habits of earthlings in this society at this point in time.
If there are people or situations that tend to bring out the worst in
you, and you can’t avoid them, sit down and devote a meditation session
to planning how you can survive the encounter without getting your
buttons pushed and with a minimum of unnecessary conict. Learning
how to prevent unskillful qualities from arising in the mind is an
important part of the path, but all too often it’s overlooked. Not every
meditation has to focus on the present. Just make sure that planning
doesn’t take over your meditation and go beyond the bounds of what’s
really helpful.
In some cases, if a friendship is centered on unskillful activities, you
might consider putting it on hold. Even though the other person’s
feelings might be hurt, you have to ask yourself which is more precious:
that person’s feelings or the state of your mind. (And remember: Simply
hurting another person’s feelings is not the same thing as causing that
person harm.) You’ll eventually have more to oﬀer that person—if you
practice seriously, you can become that person’s admirable friend—so
don’t think of your pulling away as an unkind act.
If your friends are concerned that you’re becoming less social, talk the
issue over with someone you trust.
e principle of being selective with your friends applies not only to
people in the esh, but also to the media: newspapers, magazines,
television, radio, internet, internet, internet. Here it’s easier to turn things
oﬀ without compunction. If you do feel the need to spend time with the
media, ask yourself each time: Why am I doing this? What kind of
people will I be associating with when I do? When they say something,
why do they want me to believe it? Can I trust them? Who are their
sponsors?
Even reading/watching the news has its dangers for someone training
the mind. ere’s nothing wrong with trying to stay informed of current

118
events, but you have to be sensitive to the eﬀect that too much attention
to the news can have on your mind. e basic message of the news is that
your time is unimportant, that the important things in the world are
what other people are doing in other places. is is the opposite of the
message of meditation: that the most important thing happening in your
world is what you’re doing right here, right now.
So exercise moderation even in the amount of news you watch.
Instead, watch the news being made right at your breath. And when you
have news of this sort to report, report it only to people who have earned
your trust.
Frugality
Buddhist monks are encouraged every day to reect on why they use
the four requisites of life: food, clothing, shelter, and medicine. e
purpose of this reection is to see if they’ve been using these things to
excess or in ways that will develop unskillful states of mind. ey’re also
advised to reect on the fact that each of the requisites has come about
through the sacrices of many, many people and other living beings. is
reection encourages the monks to live simply and to aim ultimately at a
truly noble form of happiness that places no burdens on anyone at all.
Lay meditators benet from reecting daily in this way as well, to
counteract the way society at large encourages you to focus your attention
on consumption and acquisition with no thought for the consequences.
So stop to think, for example, when you eat: Is it just to keep yourself
strong enough to fulll your duties? Or are you, in the words of the
Buddhist texts, searching out the tip-top tastes with the tip of your
tongue? Are you bulking up just to look good? If so, you’re fostering
unskillful states of mind. Are you too picky about what kinds of food you
will and won’t eat? If so, you’re spending too much time and money on
your eating—time and money that could be used to develop generosity
or other skillful mental states.
You have to realize that in eating—even if it’s vegetarian food—you’re
placing a burden on the world around you, so you want to give some

119
thought to the purposes served by the strength you gain from your food.
Don’t eat just for the fun of it, because the beings—human and animal—
who provided the food didn’t provide it in fun. Make sure the energy gets
put to good use.
is doesn’t mean, however, that you should starve yourself. Starving
yourself to look good is also unskillful, in that it drains away the energy
you need to practice, and keeps you inordinately fastened on the
appearance of the body. e traditional term for wise eating is moderation
in eating: having a sense of just right, of exactly how much is needed to
keep you healthy and strong enough to stick with the training of the
mind.
e same principle holds true for the other requisites. You don’t want
to be a miser, but at the same time you don’t want to waste the resources
that you or someone you depend on worked so hard to acquire. Don’t be
a slave to style. Don’t take more from the world than you’re willing to give
back. And learn to undo the perceptions—so heavily promoted by the
media—that shopping is a form of therapy and that a purchase is
nothing but a victory or a gain. Every purchase also entails loss. To begin
with, there’s the loss of money that could be used to develop skillful
qualities of mind—such as generosity—rather than unskillful qualities,
like greed. en there’s a loss of freedom. All too often, the things you
own begin to own you. e more things you own, the more you have to
fear from the dangers that can come to things, such as theft, re, and
ood. So learn to restrict your purchases to things that really are useful,
and use the money you save to help advance the higher qualities of life,
both for yourself and for those around you. ink of frugality as a gift
both to yourself and to the world.
Seclusion
Seclusion enables you to look directly at the issues created by your
own mind without the distraction of issues created by other people. It’s a
chance to get in touch with yourself and to reaﬃrm your true values. is

120
is why the Buddha advised monks to go into the wilderness, and to create
a wilderness state of mind even when living in society.
ere are several ways you can create that state of mind in your life.
Chanting. To foster a sense of seclusion around your daily meditation
session, you might nd it helpful to chant before you meditate. is is
especially helpful if you notice that your mind is carrying a lot of issues
from the day. e sound of the chanting is calming, and the words of the
chanting help to put you in a new frame of mind. ere are many
chanting texts available on-line, and many sound les showing how to
pronounce the words. It’s possible to chant in any of the Asian Buddhist
languages, in your own language, or a combination of both. Experiment
to see which style of chanting is most eﬀective for putting you in the best
frame of mind to meditate.
Retreats. In addition to your daily meditation session, it’s helpful to
nd times at regular intervals when you can set aside longer periods of
time for meditation practice. is allows you to go deeper into your mind
and to recharge your practice in general. ere are two ways you can do
this, and it’s useful to try both. e rst is to nd time on a regular basis
every week or two to devote a larger part of the day than you normally do
for the practice. e second is to go on an extended retreat once or twice
a year.
• Traditionally, Buddhists set aside four days out of the month—the
full-moon day, the new-moon day, and the two half-moon days—for
more earnest practice. is is called observing the uposatha (oo-PO-sa-ta).
e most common way of observing the uposatha involves taking the
eight precepts, listening to the Dhamma (the Buddha’s teachings), and
meditating.
e eight precepts build on the ve. e third precept is changed from
no illicit sex to no sex at all. With the remaining three precepts you
promise yourself that for the duration of the day you’ll refrain from:

121
6) Eating food during the period from noon until the following
dawn
7) Watching shows, listening to music, using jewelry, cosmetics,
and scents
8) Sitting on high, luxurious seats or lying on high, luxurious beds
ese precepts essentially add the principle of restraint of the senses
to the ve precepts. Because they place limits on the pleasure you try to
take from each of the ve physical senses, they encourage you to examine
your attachment to the body and to sensual pleasures, and to look for
pleasure in training your mind instead.
To listen to the Buddha’s teachings, you can read a Dhamma book
aloud or listen to any of the good Dhamma talks available online.
Of course, you can adjust these observances as ts your schedule. For
instance, you can vary the number of times you attempt them in one
month. You can schedule them for days you’re normally oﬀ work. If you
can’t eat before noon, you can simply promise yourself that you won’t eat
food after the mid-day meal.
If you have friends who are meditators, you might try scheduling an
uposatha day together to see if the energy of the group helps or hinders
your practice. Although it may seem strange to seek seclusion in the
company of others, you may nd that it makes the practice feel less
lonely, for you can see that you’re not the only person bucking the values
of society at large. To help foster an atmosphere of seclusion in the group,
agree on the amount of conversation you want to engage in. Avoid
discussions of politics. Generally, the more silence, the better. You’re not
meeting to teach one another through words. You’re meeting to teach and
support one another through example.
• As for extended retreats, there are many meditation centers oﬀering
retreats throughout the year. e advantage of centers like these is that
they tend to enforce a set group schedule, which helps to structure your
day. is can be important if you’re just getting started with meditation

122
and have trouble being a self-starter. Also, the work schedule tends to be
minimal. Your food will be cooked for you, so you’ll have more time for
formal meditation.
However, you have to be careful in choosing a good center. Many are
run as businesses with sizable staﬀs. is drives the fees up and drives
the Dhamma away from what the Buddha taught and in the direction of
what pleases a large clientele. Some centers will apply subtle pressure at
the end of the retreat for you to give a donation to the center or the
teacher(s) of the retreat, claiming that this is an ancient Buddhist
custom. e tradition of giving donations is a Buddhist custom; the
tradition of applying pressure for donations is not.
If the Dhamma taught on the retreat goes against what you know is
true, avoid the Dhamma talks and meditate someplace else in the center.
If you’re not sure, meditate during the Dhamma talks, giving all your
attention to your meditation theme. If anything in the talk is relevant or
helpful to what you’re doing, it will come right to your attention. As for
everything else, you can let it pass.
Even the centers run on a donation basis can teach very strange
versions of the Dhamma. If you sense anything of a cultish atmosphere at
a center, leave immediately. If they refuse to let you leave, make a scene.
Remember, you have to protect your mind.
Meditation monasteries are another alternative. ey charge no fees,
as everything is run on a donation basis. But because you will be expected
to help with the daily chores, you may have less time for formal
meditation. Also, meditation monasteries often don’t have set group
schedules, so you’ll have to be more of a self-starter. And even here, you
have to be discriminating in how you listen to the Dhamma.
You can also search the internet for centers that allow you to rent a
small cabin to meditate on your own.
Another alternative is to go camping. In the United States, state and
national forests and federal BLM (Bureau of Land Management) land
tend to provide more opportunities for seclusion than state and national

123
parks, as they don’t force you to stay in campgrounds. Being in the
wilderness also helps to put many of the issues of your daily life into a
larger perspective. ere’s a reason why the Buddha went into the
wilderness to gain awakening.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
For some general perspectives on practice in daily life: “Skills to Take
with You” in Meditations; “A Meditative Life” in Meditations2
On using the breath in diﬃcult social situations: “Social Anxiety” in
Meditations3
On controlling your mouth: “Right Speech” in Noble Strategy
On examining your intentions: “e Road to Nirvana is Paved with
Skillful Intentions” in Noble Strategy
On the etiquette of generosity, both for those who give and for those
who receive: “No Strings Attached” in Head & Heart Together
On renunciation and uposatha practice: “e Dignity of Restraint” in
Meditations; “Trading Candy for Gold” in Noble Strategy
On forgiveness: “Reconciliation, Right & Wrong” in Purity of Heart
On some of the issues encountered in following the precepts: “Getting
the Message” and “Educating Compassion” in Purity of Heart; “e
Healing Power of the Precepts” in Noble Strategy
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):
2011/6/20: For the Survival of Your Goodness   (read)
2011/10/22: After-work Meditation   (read)
2009/8/14: A Culture of Self-reliance   (read)
2006/10/13: A Wilderness Mind at Home   (read)
2010/8/25: Skills to Take Home   (read)
2001/8: New Feeding Habits   (read)
2007/12/20: e Skill of Restraint   (read)
2011/8/12: Right Speech, Inside & Out   (read)

124
2012/4/16: A Meditator is a Good Friend to Have   (read)
2010/12/10: e Ivory Intersection   (read)
2009/1/23: Caring Without Clinging   (read)
2011/5/12: Protecting Your Space   (read)
2008/5/28: An Anthropologist from Mars   (read)
2005/3/16: Renunciation   (read)

125
PA R T  F O U R
Advanced Practice
Breath meditation is an ideal practice for giving rise to strong states of
concentration, called jhana. Jhana then provides an ideal basis for
fostering the insights that can free the mind from its habitual ways of
causing itself suﬀering and stress. ose insights can ultimately lead to an
experience of release into the unconditioned dimension—called the
deathless—where suﬀering and stress all end. So there are three aspects
to advanced practice: jhana, insight, and release.
JHANA
e Pali Canon describes four levels of jhana, and ve formless
attainments—states of concentration in which there is no experience of
the form of the body—that take the fourth jhana as their point of
departure. Texts drawing on the Pali Canon have mapped out these
descriptions, listing the factors that go into each jhana or formless
attainment.
It’s important when reading these lists to realize that they’re not
recipes. For instance, you can’t simply take the ve factors of the rst
jhana, combine them, and then expect to get the rst jhana. at would
be like hearing that the tropical fruit durian smells like custard combined
with garlic, and that it contains a little cyanide, some vitamin E, and a
large dose of potassium. If you simply combined these ingredients in
hopes of getting durian, you’d actually get a poisonous mess.
e lists of jhana factors are more like restaurant reviews. ey tell
you what a successful version of a particular dish should or shouldn’t
taste like, but they don’t give many clues on how to make that dish
yourself.

126
So to get the most out of the restaurant reviews, you can combine
them with a recipe to give you a fuller idea of how the recipe should
work. at’s what’s oﬀered here. e basic recipe for jhana is given in
Parts One and Two of this book. When you focus on the breath
following the recipe, and things begin to go well, these are some of the
experiences you can expect.
e rst jhana. Traditionally, the rst jhana has ve factors: directed
thought, evaluation, singleness of preoccupation (the theme you’re
focused on), rapture, and pleasure. e rst three factors are the causes;
the last two, the results. In other words, you don’t do rapture and
pleasure. ey come about when you do the rst three factors well.
In this case, directed thought means that you keep directing your
thoughts to the breath. You don’t direct them anywhere else. is is the
factor that helps you stay concentrated on one thing.
Evaluation is the discernment factor, and it covers several activities.
You evaluate how comfortable the breath is, and how well you’re staying
with the breath. You think up ways of improving either your breath or
the way you’re focused on the breath; then you try them out, evaluating
the results of your experiments. If they don’t turn out well, you try to
think up new approaches. If they do turn out well, you try to gure out
how to get the most out of them. is last aspect of evaluation includes
the act of spreading good breath energy into diﬀerent parts of the body,
spreading your awareness to ll the body as well, and then maintaining
that sense of full-body breath and full-body awareness.
Evaluation also plays a role in ghting oﬀ any wandering thoughts that
might arise: It quickly assesses the damage that would come to your
concentration if you followed such thoughts, and reminds you of why you
want to come back on topic. When the meditation is going well,
evaluation has less work to do in this area and can focus more directly on
the breath and the quality of your focus on the breath.
In short, evaluation plays both a passive and an active role in your
relation to the breath. Its passive role is simply stepping back to watch

127
how things are going. In this role, it develops both your alertness and
your inner observer, which I discussed in Part One. e active role of
evaluation is to pass judgment on what you’ve observed and to gure out
what to do with it. If you judge that the results of your mental actions
aren’t satisfactory, you try to nd ways to change what you’re doing, and
then put your ideas to the test. If the results are satisfactory, you gure
out ways to maintain them and put them to good use. is develops your
inner doer so that it can be more skillful in shaping the state of your
mind.
Singleness of preoccupation means two things: First, it refers to the fact
that your directed thought and evaluation both stay with nothing but the
breath. In other words, your preoccupation is single in the sense that it’s
the one thing you’re focused on. Second, your preoccupation is single in
the sense that one thing—the breath—lls your awareness. You may be
able to hear sounds outside the body, but your attention doesn’t run to
them. ey’re totally in the background. (is point applies to all the
jhanas, and can even apply to the formless attainments, although some
people, on reaching the formless attainments, nd that they don’t hear
sounds.)
When these three factors are solid and skillful, rapture and pleasure
arise. e word “rapture” here is a translation of a Pali word—piti—that
can also mean refreshment. It’s basically a form of energy and can be
experienced in many ways: either as a quiet, still fullness in body and
mind; or else as a moving energy, such as a thrill running through the
body or waves washing over you. Sometimes it will cause the body to
move. With some people, the experience is intense; for others, it’s gentler.
is can, in part, be determined by how much your body is hungering for
the energy. If it’s really hungry, the experience will be intense. If not, the
experience may hardly be noticeable.
As I noted in Part Two, most people nd the rapture pleasant, but
some nd it unpleasant. In either case, the important point is not to
focus on it, but to stay focused on the breath. Let the rapture move any

128
way it likes. You don’t have to try to control it. Otherwise, you drop the
causal factors—directed thought, evaluation, and singleness of
preoccupation—and your concentration unravels.
Pleasure is the sense of ease and well-being that come when the body
feels soothed by the breath, and the mind is pleasurably interested in the
work of the meditation. Here again it’s important to stay focused on the
breath and not to focus on the pleasure, for that would lose touch with
the causes of the concentration.
Instead, use your awareness of the breath and your powers of
evaluation to allow—that’s the operative word: allow—the feelings of
rapture and pleasure to ll the body. When rapture and pleasure totally
interpenetrate the body, they strengthen the singleness of your
preoccupation with the whole-body breath.
In this way, the activity of evaluation, instead of being an unfortunate
unsteadiness in your concentration, actually strengthens it, so that the
mind is ready to settle down more securely.
As you work with the breath in this way, you’ll notice that your
awareness of the body has two aspects: focused awareness and the
background awareness already in your body. e background awareness
is simply your receptivity to the full range of sensory input coming in
from all the parts of the body. e focused awareness is located at the
spot where you’re paying special attention to that input and developing it
further. One of the jobs of your evaluation is to get these two aspects of
awareness in touch with each other. e background awareness is already
there, just like the background breath energy in the body. e question—
both with the background awareness and with the background energy—
is: Is it full? Remember that, when dealing with the breath, you’re not
trying forcefully to pump breath into areas where it’s never been before.
You’re simply allowing all the aspects of breath energy to connect. e
connectedness is what allows them all to become full. e same principle
applies to your awareness: You’re not trying to create new awareness. You

129
want your focused awareness simply to connect with your background
awareness so that they form a solid, fully alert whole.
As both the breath and the awareness come together in this way, you
enter the second jhana.
e second jhana has three factors: singleness of preoccupation,
rapture, and pleasure. As the breath and awareness become one, they
begin to feel saturated. No matter how much you try to make them feel
even more full, they can’t ll any further. At this point, directed thought
and evaluation have no further work to do. You can let them go. is
allows the mind to enter an even stronger sense of oneness. Your focused
awareness and your background awareness become rmly one, and they
in turn become one with the breath.
It’s as if, in the rst jhana, you were identifying with one part of your
breath and one part of your awareness as you worked another part of the
breath through another part of your awareness. Now those dividing lines
are erased. Awareness becomes one, the breath becomes one, and both
become one with each other. Another analogy is to think of the mind as
the lens of a camera. In rst jhana, the focal point is located in front of
the lens. In the second, it moves into the lens itself. is sense of oneness
is maintained through all the remaining jhanas and formless states up
through the level known as the dimension of the innitude of
consciousness (see below).
Here in the second jhana, both the pleasure and the rapture become
more prominent, but there’s no need to consciously spread them through
the body. ey spread on their own. e rapture, though, is a moving
energy. Although it may feel extremely refreshing to begin with, it can
ultimately become tiresome. When that happens, try to rene the focus
of your attention to a level of breath energy that’s not aﬀected by the
movements of rapture. You might think of it as tuning your radio from
one station playing loud music to another playing softer music. Even
though the radio waves of both stations can exist in the same place, the
act of tuning-in to one enables you to tune-out the other.

130
When you can stay with that more rened level of energy, you enter
the third jhana.
e third jhana has two factors: singleness of preoccupation and
pleasure. e sense of pleasure here feels very still in the body. As it lls
the body, there’s no sense that you’re lling the body with moving breath
energy. Instead, you’re allowing the body to be lled with a solid, still
energy. People have also described this breath as “resilient” or “steely.”
ere is still a subtle sense of the ow of the breath around the edges of
the body, but it feels like the movement of water vapor around an ice
cube, surrounding the ice but not causing it to expand or contract.
Because the mind doesn’t have to deal with the movement of the breath
energy, it can grow more settled and still. It too becomes more solid and
equanimous in the presence of the bodily pleasure.
As the mind gets even more centered and still in this way, it enters the
fourth jhana.
e fourth jhana has two factors: singleness of preoccupation and
equanimity. At this point, even the subtle movement of the in-and-out
breath falls still. ere are no waves or gaps in the breath energy. Because
the mind is so still, the brain is converting less oxygen into carbon
dioxide, so the chemical sensors in the brain feel no need to tell the body
to breathe. e oxygen that the body absorbs passively is enough to
provide for its needs. Awareness lls the body, breath lls the body,
breath lls awareness: is is singleness of preoccupation in full. It’s also
the point in concentration practice where mindfulness becomes pure:
ere are no lapses in your ability to remember to stay with the breath.
Because both the mind and the breath are still, equanimity becomes pure
as well. e mind is at total equilibrium.
When you’ve learned to maintain this sense of balanced stillness in the
breath, you can focus on balancing the other properties of the body as
well. First balance the heat and the cold. If the body feels too warm,
notice where the coolest spot in the body is. Focus on the coolness there,
and then allow it to spread, just as you’d spread the still breath. Similarly,

131
if you feel too cold, nd the warmest spot in the body. After you can
maintain your focus on the warmth there, allow it to spread. See if you
can then bring the coolness and warmth into balance, so that the body
feels just right.
Similarly with the solidity of the body: Focus on the sensations that
seem heaviest or most solid in the body. en allow that solidity to
spread through the body. If the body feels too heavy, then think of the
still breath making it lighter. Try to nd a balance so that you feel neither
too heavy nor too light.
is exercise not only makes the body more comfortable as a basis for
rmer concentration, but also acquaints you with the properties that
make up your inner sense of the body. As we noted in Part Two, being
acquainted with these properties provides you with a useful set of tools
for dealing with pain and out-of-body experiences. is exercise also
gives you practice in seeing the power of your perceptions: Simply
noticing and labeling a particular sensation can make it stronger.
e four jhanas focus on the same topic—the breath—but the way
they relate to the breath grows progressively more rened. Once the
mind reaches the fourth jhana, this can form the basis for the formless
attainments. Here the relationship among the stages is reversed: All the
formless attainments relate to their themes in the same way—with the
equanimity and singleness of the fourth jhana—but they focus on
diﬀerent themes. Here we will discuss just the rst four of the formless
attainments, as the fth formless attainment—the cessation of
perception and feeling—lies beyond the scope of this book.
e formless attainments. As the mind in the fourth jhana stays with
the stillness of the breath lling the body, it begins to sense that the only
reason it feels a boundary or form to the body is because of the perception
or mental image of the body’s form that it’s been holding to. ere is no
movement of the breath to conrm that perception. Instead, the body
feels like a cloud of mist droplets, each droplet a sensation, but with no
clear boundary to the cloud.

132
To reach the rst formless attainment, allow the perception of the
form of the body to drop away. en focus, not on the droplets of
sensation, but on the space in-between them. is space then goes out
beyond the body without limit and can penetrate everything else.
However, you don’t try to trace it out to its limit. You simply hold in
mind the perception of “innite space” or “unlimited space.” If you can
stay there solidly, you reach the rst formless attainment, the dimension of
the innitude of space. See how long you can stay with that perception.
To become adept at staying with the perception of innite space, you
can try holding to it even when you’ve left formal meditation. As you go
through the day, replace your inner focus on the breath at a spot in the
body with a focus on the perception of “space” permeating everything:
your body, the space around the body, other people, the physical objects
around you. Hold that perception of space in the back of your mind.
Whatever’s happening inside or outside your body, it’s all happening in
the context of that perception of space. is creates a great feeling of
lightness as you go through the day. If you can maintain this perception
in the midst of your daily activities, you’ll have an easier time accessing it
and staying steadily focused on it each time you sit down for formal
meditation.
After you’ve become adept at staying with the perception of innite
space, you can pose the question, “What knows innite space?” Your
attention shifts to the awareness of the space, and you realize that the
awareness, like the space, has no limits, although again you don’t try to
trace it out to its limits. You just stay centered where you are. (If you try
asking this question before you’re adept at staying with the perception of
innite space, the mind will just revert to a lower level of concentration,
or may leave concentration entirely. So go back to the perception of
space.) If you can stay with that perception of innite or unlimited
awareness—or simply, “knowing, knowing, knowing”—you enter the
second formless attainment, the dimension of the innitude of consciousness.

133
As with the perception of space, you can train yourself to become
adept at the perception of innite consciousness by holding to it even
when you’ve left formal meditation. Keep in mind the perception that,
whatever is happening inside you or outside you, it’s all happening within
the context of an all-around awareness. is, too, creates a great feeling of
lightness as you go through the day, and makes it easier to settle back in
with the perception of innite awareness when you turn the mind to the
practice of full concentration.
It’s at this stage that your inner observer gets thrown into sharp relief.
When you dropped the breath for the perception of “space,” you gained a
clear sense that your breath and your awareness of the breath were two
separate things, and you could see precisely where and how they were
separate. When you dropped the perception of “space,” you could see that
the awareness was separate even from space. As you carry your
perception of “aware” into daily life, you can apply the same principle to
everything that comes your way: Objects and events are one thing; the
knowing awareness is something else.
After you’ve become adept at staying with the perception of innite
awareness or innite knowing, then while you’re in formal meditation
you can start to take this sense of the “knower” or “observer” apart. To do
this, there are two questions you can ask yourself. Either, “What is still a
disturbance in this knowing?” or “What’s maintaining the sense of
oneness in this knowing?” You see that the answer in both cases is the
perception of “knowing, knowing, knowing,” or “aware, aware, aware.”
You drop that perception, and in so doing you drop the sense of oneness.
What’s left is a sense of nothingness. ere’s still awareness, but you’re
not labeling it as awareness. You’re just with the sense of lightness that
comes from replacing the label of “knowing” with something that feels
less burdensome. e label of “knowing” requires that you make an eﬀort
to keep knowing. But the label of “nothing” allows you to put that burden
down. If you can stay with that perception of, “ere’s nothing” or

134
“Nothing’s happening,” you enter the third formless attainment, the
dimension of nothingness.
After you’ve become adept at staying with the perception of “ere’s
nothing” or “Nothing’s happening,” you can ask yourself if there’s still any
disturbance in that sense of nothingness. When you see that the
disturbance is caused by the perception itself, you drop the perception. If
you do this when your focus is not subtle enough, you’ll revert to a lower
stage of concentration. But if you can stay in the mental space left empty
by the perception when it falls away, that’s what you do. You can’t say that
there’s another perception there, but because you have a non-verbal sense
that you know where you are, you can’t say that there’s no perception,
either. If you can continue staying there, you enter the fourth formless
attainment, the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.
Wrong concentration. ere are several states of concentration that
mimic these levels of concentration in some respects, but they are wrong
concentration. is is because—unlike the levels of right concentration
—their range of awareness is so narrow that it doesn’t provide a basis for
the arising of insight.
Two of the most common states of wrong concentration are delusion
concentration and the state of non-perception. People who are adept at
denial or dissociation can be prone to these states. I have also known
people who mistake them for release, which is a very dangerous mistake
because it blocks all further progress on the path. So it’s important to
recognize these states for what they are.
Delusion concentration we have already discussed in Part Two. It comes
about when the breath gets so comfortable that your focus drifts from the
breath to the sense of comfort itself, your mindfulness begins to blur, and
your sense of the body and your surroundings gets lost in a pleasant haze.
When you emerge, you nd it hard to identify where exactly you were
focused.
e state of non-perception comes about from making your focus
extremely one-pointed and so rened that it refuses to settle on or label

135
even the most eeting mental objects. You drop into a state in which you
lose all sense of the body, of any internal or external sounds, or of any
thoughts or perceptions at all. ere’s just enough tiny awareness to let
you know, when you emerge, that you haven’t been asleep. You can stay
there for many hours, and yet time passes very quickly. Two hours can
seem like two minutes. You can also program yourself to come out at a
particular time.
is state does have its uses—as when you’re in severe pain and want
some respite from it. As long as you recognize that it’s not right
concentration or release, the only danger is that you may decide that you
like hiding out there so much that you don’t want to do the work needed
to go further in the practice.
How to use the map of the jhanas. Just as discernment requires
concentration to grow, concentration requires discernment. e two
qualities help each other along. So now that you have a map to the stages
of concentration, you need to exercise some discernment in using it
properly so that it doesn’t become an obstacle to the practice. Here are a
few pointers to keep in mind:
is map presents possibilities.
e way your concentration develops may fall clearly in line with the
map, or it may not. Some people nd that their concentration goes
naturally from one stage to the next with no planning on their part;
others nd that they have to make a conscious decision to move from one
stage to the next. Also, you may nd that the stages of your practice may
not line up precisely with those on the map. Some people, for instance,
experience an extra stage between the rst and the second jhana, in which
directed thought falls away but there’s still a modicum of evaluation.
Others don’t see clear steps in their progress. e mind settles down so
quickly to one particular stage that they’re not consciously aware of
having gone through the preceding steps. It’s like falling suddenly to the

136
bottom of a well: You don’t notice how many layers of brick line the side
of the well. You just know that you’ve hit bottom.
Some of these variations are perfectly ne. However, if you nd that
your mind goes straight to the formless steps without rst passing
through the jhanas in which you have a clear sense of the whole body,
back up and make an extra eﬀort to stay with the breath and fully inhabit
the body. Work particularly hard at the steps associated with the rst
jhana: making yourself aware of the whole body breathing, and spreading
breath energy to areas where it doesn’t seem to ow. is may seem less
restful and quiet than the formless states, but it’s necessary both for your
concentration to be well grounded and for insight to arise. If the mind
skips over the steps related to the body, it’s simply blocking out the body
and turns into concentration based on denial. Denial may shut out
distractions, but it isn’t conducive to clear, all-around discernment.
Keep the map in the background of your awareness as you meditate, not in
the foreground.
Remember, the theme of your meditation is the breath, not the factors
of jhana. e map can be kept in the back of your mind to be pulled out
when you’re faced with three kinds of choices: what to do when you can’t
get into a state of stillness, what to do when you’re in a state of stillness
but have trouble maintaining it, and what to do when you’ve gotten stuck
in a state of stillness and don’t know where to go next.
Otherwise, don’t even think about the factors of jhana. Pay primary
attention to the breath and allow your concentration to develop naturally
from your evaluation of the breath. Try not to be like the person with a
tree bearing unripe mangoes who—told that ripe mangoes aren’t green
and hard, they’re yellow and soft—tries to ripen his mangoes by painting
them yellow and squeezing them until they’re soft. e result, of course,
is that his mangoes never get a chance to ripen. What he should do is
tend to the tree—water it, fertilize it, protect it from bugs—and the
mangoes will grow yellow and soft on their own. Watching and

137
evaluating the breath is the way you tend to the tree of your
concentration.
Don’t be too quick to label a state of concentration.
If you attain a level of concentration that seems promising, don’t label
it right then and there. Simply try to maintain it. en see if you can
reproduce it during your next session of meditation. If you can’t, don’t
pay it any further attention. If you can, then label it with a mental post-it
note, reminding yourself of how it feels, and what level it might
correspond to on the map. Don’t engrave your label in stone. As you get
more familiar with the territory of your mind, you may nd that you have
to pull oﬀ the post-it notes and rearrange them, but that’s perfectly ne.
Reread the section in Part Two on Judging Your Progress.
Don’t be too quick to push from one stage of concentration to the next.
All too often, as soon as you attain a level of concentration, the mind
asks a question of hunger: “What’s next?” e best answer is, “is is
what’s next.” Learn how to master what you’ve got. Meditation is not an
exercise in jumping through jhana hoops. If you push impatiently from
one level of concentration to the next, or if you try to analyze a new state
of concentration too quickly after you’ve attained it, you never give it the
chance to show its full potential. And you don’t give yourself the chance
to familiarize yourself with it. To get the most out of it, you need to keep
working at it as a skill. Try to reach it quickly each time you start
meditating. Try tapping into it in all situations. is enables you to see it
from a variety of perspectives and to test it over time—to see if it really is
as totally blissful, empty, and relaxed as it may have seemed at rst sight.
If moving to a new level of concentration makes you feel unsteady,
return to the level you just left and try to make it more rm before trying
the new level again at a later time.
If you’re not sure about what to do at any stage in the concentration,
simply stay with your sense of the “observer.”

138
Don’t be too quick to jump to any conclusions about whether what
you’re doing is right or wrong, or whether what you’re experiencing is
true or false. Just watch, watch, watch. At the very least, you won’t be
taken in by false assumptions. And you may gain some important
insights into how the mind can fool itself through its desire to label and
interpret things.
More important than labeling your concentration is learning what to do
with it.
Whether your concentration falls into the stages on the map or has a
few diﬀerent stages of its own, the proper way to treat any stage of
concentration is the same in all cases. First, learn to maintain it as long as
you can, in as many postures and activities as you can. Try to re-enter it
as quickly as you can. is allows you to familiarize yourself with it.
When you’re really familiar with it, pull out of it slightly so that you can
observe how the mind is relating to its object—but not so far out that
you fully leave that stage of concentration. Some people experience this
as “lifting” the mind slightly above its object. For others it feels like
having your hand snugly in a glove and then pulling it out slightly so that
it’s not fully snug but still remains in the glove.
Either way, you’re now in a position to observe the movements of the
mind around the object of its concentration. Ask yourself a question of
discernment: “Is there still any sense of disturbance or stress in the
concentration itself?” e stress might be related to the fact that the
mind is still evaluating its object when it no longer needs to, that it’s
holding onto rapture when the rapture is no longer calming, or that it’s
focused on a perception that’s not as restful as it could be. If you can’t
immediately see any stress, try to notice any variations in the level of
stress or disturbance you feel. is may take a while, but when you see a
variation in the level of stress, try to see what activity of the mind
accompanies the rises and falls of the stress. Once you identify the
activity that accompanies the rises, drop it.

139
If you can’t yet see any variation in the stress, or if your analysis starts
getting blurry, it’s a sign that your concentration isn’t yet strong enough to
engage in this kind of analysis. Drop the analysis and plant yourself
rmly back in the object of your concentration. Don’t be impatient. Stay
with the object until you feel refreshed and solid enough to try the
analysis again.
If, however, the analysis is getting clear results, keep it up. is will
strengthen your concentration at the same time as it strengthens your
discernment. You’re learning how to evaluate your state of mind for
yourself, while you’re engaged in it, without having to consult any outside
authority. You’re gaining practice in observing how the mind creates
unnecessary stress for itself, and in training it not to continue creating
that stress. at’s what the meditation is all about.
At the same time, you’re mastering a line of questioning that—as your
concentration and discernment grow deeper and subtler—gives rise to
the insight leading to release.
INSIGHT
As I noted in the Introduction, the basic strategy of the practice is to
observe your actions—along with their motivations and results—and
then to question them: Do they lead to suﬀering? If so, are they
necessary? If not, how can you act in other ways that don’t lead to
suﬀering? If they don’t lead to suﬀering, how can you master them as
skills? is strategy applies not only to your words and deeds, but also to
the acts of the mind: its thoughts and emotions.
And as I noted in the last section, when you develop jhana, you use
this strategy of observing and questioning to abandon any distracting
thoughts and to develop the factors of jhana in their place. It’s through
this process that the practice of jhana develops your discernment and
insight. When your jhana becomes more stable, you can develop that
insight further by looking for a course of action that causes even less

140
stress than jhana. Here again, the important point is to view the factors
of jhana as activities and to ask the right questions about them.
Fabrication. e activities here are the three types of fabrications by
which the mind shapes experience: bodily, verbal, and mental. If you
compare the descriptions of jhana and breath meditation with the
descriptions of fabrication in the Introduction, you’ll notice that jhana
makes use of all three. e breath is bodily fabrication; the directed
thought and evaluation of the rst jhana are verbal fabrications; the
perceptions that keep the mind in the various jhanas and formless
attainments are mental fabrications, as are the feelings of pleasure and
equanimity that come from staying in those states of concentration.
is is why jhana is so useful in giving rise to the insight that totally
ends the unnecessary stress that the mind creates through its own
fabrications. Jhana gives you a still vantage point for watching those
fabrications in action.
You can do this in any of three ways:
• while you’re in a particular stage of jhana;
• when you move from one stage to another; or
• when you come out of concentration and observe what fabrications
the mind takes up as it engages with the world outside.
In any of these situations, you can observe that (1) fabrications are
actually actions, arising and passing away; (2) they’re creating stress; (3)
what they’re doing is unnecessary; and (4) the pleasure they give isn’t
worth the stress they entail. Only when you see all four of these aspects
can insight lead to release from unnecessary suﬀering and stress. And
that’s when you see that the only stress weighing down the mind was the
unnecessary sort. Once that stress is gone, nothing at all can weigh the
mind down. It’s free.
To watch any of the jhanas as forms of mental action requires not
seeing them as metaphysical principles—say, as a Ground of Being, a
True Self, Cosmic Oneness, Primordial Emptiness, Encounter with God,

141
or any other grand-sounding abstraction. e metaphysical trap is an
easy one to fall into, especially if you’ve primed yourself to think in those
terms. If, for instance, you’ve been thinking in metaphysical terms and
then attain the oneness of the second jhana, it’s easy to assume that
you’ve touched Cosmic Oneness or Interconnection. If you attain the
sense of innite knowing of the dimension of the innitude of
consciousness, it’s easy to assume that you’ve gained access to a level of
awareness underlying all reality. You might interpret these experiences as
contact with some sort of ground from which all things come and to
which they all return. Or you might decide that the strengthened sense of
“observer” in that state of mind is your True Self. If you fall for any of
these interpretations, though, you lose sight of the way in which your
actions fashioned the experience to begin with. at way you miss the
subtle levels of stress still present in those experiences. e exalted
interpretations you assign to them blind you to the fabrications they still
contain.
To get around this pitfall, you simply stick with the line of questioning
introduced at the end of the last section: Look for any rise or fall in the
level of stress within that experience. en look for the activity of the
mind that accompanies that rise and fall. When you see the activity in
action, drop it.
is is called contemplating inconstancy and the stress in inconstancy.
When you see the stress, ask yourself if anything inconstant and stressful
is worth claiming as you or yours. When you realize that the answer is
No, this is called contemplating not-self. You’re not taking a stance on
whether or not there is a self. You’re simply asking whether you want to
identify with the parts of the committee creating the stress.
Developing disenchantment. e purpose of these contemplations is
to induce a sense of disenchantment and dispassion for the actions of
fabrication. Because passion is what drives all three kinds of fabrication,
dispassion ends any desire to keep engaging in them. When you don’t
engage in them, they stop. e result is a total letting go.

142
e sense of disenchantment—which in most cases reaches maturity
only after you’ve approached these contemplations from many angles—is
the crucial turning point in this process. e Pali term for
disenchantment, nibbida, corresponds to the feeling you have when you’ve
eaten enough of a particular food and don’t want any more of it. is is
not aversion. It’s simply a sense that what you used to enjoy eating no
longer holds any interest for you. You’ve had enough.
You need to develop this sense of disenchantment toward the mind’s
fabrications because they all follow the same pattern we’ve mentioned
many times: ey’re a form of eating. e food here may be either
physical or mental, but the dynamic of feeding in every case is the same.
You’re trying to ll a lack, to allay a hunger. Only when you can
counteract the hunger with a sense of enough can you reach
disenchantment. Only with disenchantment can you stop feeding and
nd the dimension where there’s no need to feed.
Insight into becoming. ink back on the image of the mind’s
committee. Each committee member corresponds to a diﬀerent desire, a
diﬀerent sense of who you are based around that desire, and a diﬀerent
sense of the world in which you can search for what will fulll that desire.
Your sense of who you are here is composed of two things: the self that
will experience the happiness of fullling that desire, and the self that has
the powers to bring that desire to fulllment. e rst self is the self as
consumer; the second, the self as producer. e self as consumer is what
needs to be fed; the self as producer is what nds and xes the food; and
the world of experience connected to the desire is the area of experience
where you look for food.
As I noted in the Introduction, each individual sense of self in a
particular world of experience is described by the term becoming.
Becoming is a type of being—the sense of what you are and what exists
around you—based on doing. It’s not static being. It’s being in action.
And as you’ve been meditating, you’ve had plenty of opportunity to see
how the primary action underlying this being is a kind of feeding. Each

143
sense of who you are has to be nourished, to take something from the
world, in order to survive.
You notice this rst with the distracting thoughts that get in the way
of your concentration: e mind goes out to nibble on thoughts of lust,
to gobble down thoughts of anger, to sip pleasant memories from the
past, to chew on past regrets, or to wolf down worries about the future.
e basic strategy of concentration is rst to see that you don’t have to
identify with these diﬀerent senses of who you are. at’s why we use the
image of the committee: to help you realize that you won’t be starved of
pleasure if you drop a few of these becomings. You’ve got better ones with
which to feed. But then to keep yourself from sneaking out to chew on
your old junk food, you have to nourish the more skillful members of the
committee, the ones who are learning to work together to develop and
maintain your concentration. is is one of the roles of the rapture,
pleasure, and rened equanimity in concentration: to nourish the skillful
members of your committee. When you practice concentration, you’re
feeding them good, nourishing food.
As you get less and less inclined to feed in your old ways—as your
taste in inner food grows more rened—you gradually come to a point
where you can see that even the concentration is a kind of becoming. In
other words, in jhana you identify with the skillful members of the
committee who can provide the food of concentration (the self as
producer), as well as with the meditator feeding oﬀ the pleasure and
rapture provided by the meditation (the self as consumer). e object of
meditation—either the form of the body or the dimensions of
formlessness—is the world from which you feed.
As long as you hold to these identities and these worlds as having solid
unity, it’s hard to go beyond them. It’s hard to let go of them. is is why
the Buddha’s strategy is to sidestep this sense of solid unity by regarding
the building blocks of identity as actions, for actions are easier to let go of
than a solid sense of who you are.

144
e ve aggregates. Because these actions are primarily related to
feeding, the Buddha’s approach in developing insight is to take the types
of fabrication involved in creating every becoming and gather them under
a list of ve activities that are basic to feeding on every level.
ese activities are called khandhas. is is a Pali word that means
“heap” or “mass.” e standard English translation, though, is “aggregate.”
is translation apparently comes from a distinction popular in
eighteenth and nineteenth century Europe, between conglomerates of
things that work together in an organic unity—called “systems”—and
conglomerates that are just random collections of things, called
“aggregates.” e purpose of translating khandha as “aggregate” was to
convey the useful point that even though we tend to regard our sense of
identity as having organic unity, it’s actually just a random collection of
activities.
e ve activities that surround eating on the most basic level are
these:
• A sense of form: both the form of the body that needs to be
nourished (and that will be used to look for food), as well as the
physical objects that will be used as food. When feeding takes place in
the imagination, “form” applies to whatever form you assume for
yourself in the imagination, and to whatever imaginary forms you take
pleasure from.
• Feeling: the painful feeling of hunger or lack that drives you to
look for food; the pleasant feeling of satisfaction that comes when
you’ve found something to eat; and the added pleasure when you
actually eat it.
• Perception: the ability to identify the type of hunger you feel, and
to identify which of the things in your world of experience will satisfy
that hunger. Perception also plays a central role in identifying what is
and isn’t food. is is the way we rst learn to exercise our perceptions
as children. Our rst reaction on encountering something is to put it

145
into our mouth to see if it’s edible. If it is, we label it with the
perception of “food.” If it’s not, we label it as “not food.”
• Fabrication in this context refers primarily to verbal fabrications.
ese relate to feeding in the way we have to think about and evaluate
strategies for nding food, for taking possession of it when we nd it,
and for xing it if it’s not edible in its raw state. For example, if you
want to enjoy a banana, you have to gure out how to remove the peel.
If your rst attempt doesn’t work, you have to evaluate why it didn’t
and to gure out new strategies until you nd one that works.
• Consciousness: the act of being aware of all these activities.
ese ve activities are so basic to the way we engage with the world
in order to feed that they form the raw material from which we create our
various senses of self.
Now, in the practice of developing jhana based on the breath, they’re
also the raw material from which we’ve learned to create states of
concentration. “Form” corresponds to the breath. “Feeling” corresponds
to the feelings of pleasure and equanimity derived from focusing on the
breath. “Perception” corresponds to the ways we label the breath, the
formless dimensions, and the pleasures we derive from staying focused on
these themes. “Fabrication” corresponds to the thoughts and evaluations
that compose the rst jhana, and also the thoughts and evaluations by
which we ask questions about all the various stages in our concentration.
“Consciousness” is the act of being aware of all these activities.
is is why concentration is such a good laboratory for examining the
mind’s habits for creating suﬀering. It contains all the elements that go
into the identities we build around the act of feeding. And it contains
them in a controlled context—a clear and stable state of becoming—
where you can watch those elements in action and see them clearly for
what they are.
When the mind is in a solid enough position to look at even the
rened pleasures of concentration in terms of these activities, there’s no

146
need to focus on all ve of them. Simply focus on any one that seems
easiest for you to observe in action. If you’re not sure of where to start,
try starting with perception, because perception is most central to your
ability to stay focused in concentration, and it’s the aggregate you’re going
to need to work hardest to change. As long as the perception, “worth the
eﬀort,” stays xed on the act of feeding on jhana, disenchantment will not
be total. Only when the perception, “not worth the eﬀort,” gets your full
approval will disenchantment have a chance.
Still, this is a matter of personal temperament. If another aggregate
seems easier to focus on, by all means start there, for once the perception
of “not worth the eﬀort” gets rmly established with regard to that
aggregate, it will spread to encompass all the other aggregates because all
ve of them are so intimately connected.
When examining the activities that create states of concentration, you
have to remember to ask the right questions about them. If you approach
the concentration in hopes that it will answer such questions as “Who
am I?” or “What is the underlying reality of the world?”, you simply
continue the processes of becoming. If you come across an especially
impressive state of stillness or peace, your committee members who want
to feed on metaphysical absolutes will take that as their food—and will
be mighty proud of it. is blinds you to the fact that they’re still just
feeding, and that your questions are simply rened versions of the
questions of hunger.
However, if you remember to see the stillness and peace of
concentration as coming from the activities of the aggregates, you’ll
realize that no matter how well you feed on them, you’ll never be free of
reoccurring hunger. You’ll never be free of having to keep working for
your food. After all, these activities are not constant. When they fall
away, they produce a split second of concern: “What’s next?” And in that
split second, your committee members are desperate, for the question is a
question of hunger. ey want an answer right now. So these activities

147
can never provide a stable, reliable, or lasting food. Even when they
fabricate a peace that feels cosmic, they still involve stress.
When you pursue these contemplations until they reach a point of
disenchantment, the mind inclines toward something outside of space
and time, something that wouldn’t be subject to the drawbacks of these
activities. At this point, it wants nothing to do with any of the committee
members of the mind, even the ones observing and directing its
concentration, or the underlying ones that keep asking and demanding an
answer to the questions of hunger: “What’s next? Where next? What to
do next?” e mind sees that even the choice of staying in place or
moving forward to another state of concentration—even though it’s a
choice between two relatively skillful alternatives—is a choice between
nothing but two stressful alternatives, for both are fabrications. At this
point it’s poised for something that doesn’t involve either alternative,
something that involves no fabrication. When it sees the opening in that
poise, it lets go and experiences the deathless. at’s the rst stage in
experiencing release.
In this way, the mind dis-identies with all becomings without even
thinking about “self ” or “worlds.” It looks simply at actions as actions. It
sees them as stressful, unnecessary, and not worth the eﬀort. at’s what
enables it to let go.
RELEASE
ere are many dangers in trying to describe release, for people can
then easily try to clone the description without actually going through
the steps leading to genuine release—another case of squeezing and
painting the mango to make it ripe.
However, it is useful to describe some of the lessons learned from the
rst taste of release.
One is that the Buddha was right: ere really is a deathless
dimension, outside of space and time. And it really is free of suﬀering and
stress.

148
On returning from that dimension into the dimensions of space and
time, you realize that your experience of space and time didn’t begin just
with this birth. It’s been going on much longer. You may not be able to
remember the particulars of previous lifetimes, but you do know that
they’ve been happening for a long, long time.
Because you reached that dimension by abandoning the activities of
fabrication, you know that it was through the activities of fabrication that
you have been engaged in space and time all along. In other words, you’re
not just a passive observer of space and time. Your actions play a crucial
role in shaping your experience of space and time. Your actions are thus
of foremost importance. Because you see that unskillful actions simply
make it more diﬃcult to access the deathless, you never want to break the
ve precepts ever again.
Because none of the aggregates were involved in the experience of the
deathless, and yet there was still an awareness of that dimension, you see
that the act of identifying with the aggregates is a choice that places
limitations on you. You’ll never again agree with the view that they
constitute what you are.
Because you realize that the deathless dimension was always available,
but that you missed it because of your own stupidity, the rst taste of
release is humbling. It’s not a source of pride.
But above all, you realize that the activities of engaging in space and
time are inherently stressful. e only true happiness lies in gaining total
release. ere is no activity more worthwhile than that.
It’s important not to mistake a mundane breakthrough for genuine
release, for that can make you heedless and complacent in your practice.
One of the touchstones for testing the truth of your release is whether it
feels grounding or disorienting. If it’s disorienting, it’s not the real thing,
for the deathless is the safest, most secure dimension there is.
Another touchstone for testing the truth of your release is whether
you understood what you did to get there, for that’s what provides insight
into the role of fabrication and mental action in shaping all experience. If

149
your mind senses a great unburdening but without understanding how it
happened, it’s not release. It’s just a mundane breakthrough. So don’t be
heedless.
However, even people who have attained their rst taste of genuine
release can grow heedless, as the safety of their attainment can lower
their sense of urgency in the practice. ey can start getting complacent.
So whether your sense that you’ve tasted release is genuine or not, the
advice is always the same: Don’t be heedless. ere’s more work to do.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
On jhana: See the section, “Jhana,” in Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo,
Keeping the Breath in Mind, and “Method 2.” ere are also excellent
discussions of jhana in Ajaan Lee’s book, e Path to Peace & Freedom for
the Mind, under the heading, “Right Concentration” and under the
headings of “Virtue,” “Concentration,” and “Discernment” at the end of
the book.
See also the article, “Jhana Not by the Numbers,” in Purity of Heart
and the talk, “Oneness” in Meditations4.
For a thorough discussion of the Buddha’s sixteen-step instructions
for using the breath as a focal point for developing tranquility and
insight, see Right Mindfulness.
For a more advanced discussion of the role of becoming, both in the
practice of jhana and in the development of insight, see e Paradox of
Becoming.
On insight: “One Tool Among Many” in Noble Strategy; “e Integrity
of Emptiness” and “All About Change” in Purity of Heart
On the aggregates: “Five Piles of Bricks” and “De-perception” in e
Karma of Questions
On the relationship between feeding and stress: “e Weight of
Mountains” in e Karma of Questions. For a more advanced discussion
of this topic, see Chapter Two in e Shape of Suﬀering.

150
For further discussions on how to ask the questions of discernment:
Somewhat more technical than “Questions of Skill” in e Karma of
Questions, mentioned at the end of the Introduction, is “e Arrows of
inking” in Beyond All Directions. Skill in Questions oﬀers a full
treatment of this topic, with many examples from the Pali Canon. If the
size of the book puts you oﬀ, you can read just the discussions in each
chapter and leave the readings for another time.
For an anthology of passages from the Pali Canon covering the basic
qualities that the Buddha said were most important for the practice, see
e Wings to Awakening. Some people nd the Introduction to this book
a little steep, but you can start with Part ree, which is less
intimidating, and then return to the earlier parts of the book when you
want a more extensive overview.
Into the Stream contains passages from the Pali Canon on the rst
stage of awakening.
On release as the essence of the practice: “e Essence of the
Dhamma” in Beyond All Directions
On the meaning of the word nirvana: “e Image of Nirvana” in Noble
Strategy; “A Verb for Nirvana” in Purity of Heart. e Mind like Fire
Unbound oﬀers a full treatment of this topic, along with a discussion of
the topic of clinging.
For some inspiring accounts of higher stages of the practice, see Ajaan
MahaBoowa Ñanasampanno – Straight from the Heart, in particular the
talks, “At the End of One’s Rope,” “e Radiant Mind is Unawareness,”
and “An Heir to the Dhamma.” Also inspiring: “From Ignorance to
Emptiness” and “To Be an Inner Millionaire,” both in another book of
Ajaan MahaBoowa’s talks, ings as ey Are.
Inspiring in a more calming way are these talks in Ajaan Lee
Dhammadharo’s, Inner Strength: “Beyond Right & Wrong”; and “Point
Zero.”
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):

151
2009/1/30: e Four Jhanas   (read)
2011/8/21: e Poison Blowsh   (read)
2011/9/4: Proactive with Pain   (read)
2011/3/10: e Swinging Balance   (read)
2009/2/14: A Recipe for Jhāna (read)
2011/12/25: Sensitive to the Breath   (read)
2012/1/2: Generating Energy   (read)
2011/1/27: Balance & Release   (read)
2010/10/6: Broad, Tall, & Deep   (read)
2011/12/29: Full Attention   (read)
2010/10/7: Levels of Truth   (read)
2011/11/11: Feeding on Feeding   (read)
2006/10/23: Feeding Frenzy   (read)
2008/7/31: Good Eating   (read)
2010/10/9: Chewed Up by Your Food   (read)
2011/7/20: Isolating the Aggregates   (read)
2012/1/26: Sensuality   (read)
2007/12/8: Transparent Becoming   (read)
2011/10/10: Cutting New Paths in the Mind   (read)
2009/11/10: Skills of the Dhamma Wheel   (read)
2011/2/11: Heedful of Death   (read)
2011/12/27: Don’t Worry, Be Focused   (read)
2012/1/11: Strengthening Discernment   (read)
2012/6/22: Equanimity Isn’t Everything   (read)
2012/7/28: e Essence of the Dhamma   (read)
2012/8/6: Freedom through Painful Practice   (read)
Talks on the Buddha’s sixteen-step instructions in breath meditation:

152
2002/11: e Steps of Breath Meditation   (read)
2007/7/16: Lessons in Happiness   (read)
2008/2/11: On the Path of the Breath   (read)
2010/10/2: e Breath All the Way   (read)
2011/8/29: Exploring Fabrication   (read)
2012/2/3: Breath, Tranquility, & Insight   (read)

153
PA R T  F I V E
Finding a Teacher
Every earnest meditator needs a teacher. Because meditation is
training in new ways to act, you learn best when you can watch an
experienced meditator in action and at the same time can let an
experienced meditator watch you in action. at way you tap into the
accumulated wisdom of the lineage of teachers stretching back to the
Buddha, and don’t have to work through every problem completely on
your own. You don’t have to keep reinventing the Dhamma wheel from
scratch.
At the same time, a teacher is often needed to help you see areas of
your practice that you may not recognize as problems. is is because,
when you’re deluded, you don’t know you’re deluded. So one of the basic
principles of the practice is to open your behavior not only to your own
scrutiny but also to the scrutiny of a teacher whose knowledge and
goodwill you trust. at way you learn how to be open with others—and
yourself—about your mistakes, in an environment where you’re most
likely to be willing to learn.
is is especially important when you’re learning a skill—which is
what meditation is. You can learn from books and talks, but when the
time comes to practice you’ll encounter the main issue that no book or
talk can cover: knowing how to judge which lesson to apply to which
situation. If you’re not getting results, is it because you’re not putting in
enough eﬀort? Or are you making the wrong sort of eﬀort? In the words
of the Pali Canon, are you squeezing a cow’s horn in the eﬀort to get milk
when you should be squeezing the udder? Only someone who has faced
the same problem, and who knows what you’ve been doing, is in a
position to help you answer questions like these.

154
Also, if you’ve suﬀered emotional trauma or are dealing with an
addiction, you need guidance specically tailored to your strengths and
weaknesses—something no book can provide. Even if you don’t suﬀer
from these issues, a teaching tailored to your needs can save you a lot of
wasted time and eﬀort, and can help prevent you from going down some
wrong, dead-end roads. is is why the Buddha didn’t write meditation
guides like this, and instead set up the monastic training as a form of
apprenticeship. Meditation skills are best passed down person-to-person.
For these reasons, if you really want to become skillful in your
thoughts, words, and deeds, you need to nd a trustworthy teacher to
point out your blind spots. And because those spots are blindest around
your unskillful habits, the primary duty of the teacher is to point out
your faults—for only when you see your faults can you correct them;
only when you correct them are you beneting from your teacher’s
compassion in pointing them out.
is means that the rst prerequisite in beneting from a teacher is
being willing to take criticism, both gentle and harsh. is is why
genuine teachers don’t teach for money. If the teacher must be paid, the
person paying is the one determining what’s taught, and people rarely pay
for the criticism they need to hear.
But even if the teacher is teaching for free, you run into an
uncomfortable truth: You can’t open your heart to just anyone. Not
everyone who is certied as a teacher is really qualied to be a teacher.
When you listen to a teacher, you’re adding that teacher’s voice to the
committee of your mind, passing judgments on your actions, so you want
to make sure that that voice will be a positive addition. As the Buddha
pointed out, if you can’t nd a trustworthy teacher, you’re better oﬀ practicing
on your own. An unqualied teacher can do more harm than good. You
have to take care in choosing a teacher whose judgments will inuence
the way you shape your mind.
To take care means not falling into the easy trap of being judgmental
or non-judgmental—judgmental in trusting your knee-jerk likes or

155
dislikes, non-judgmental in trusting that every meditation teacher would
be equally benecial as a guide. Instead, be judicious in choosing the
person whose judgments you’re going to take on as your own.
is, of course, sounds like a Catch-22: You need a good teacher to
help develop your powers of judgment, but well-developed powers of
judgment to recognize who a good teacher might be. And even though
there’s no foolproof way out of the catch—after all, you can master a
foolproof way and still be a fool—there is a way if you’re willing to learn
from experience.
e rst step in learning to be judicious is to remember what it means
to judge in a helpful way. ink, not of a Supreme Court Justice sitting
on her bench, passing a nal verdict of guilt or innocence, but of a piano
teacher listening to you play. She’s not passing a nal verdict on your
potential as a pianist. Instead, she’s judging a work in progress: listening
to your intention for the performance, listening to your execution of that
intention, and then deciding whether it works. If it doesn’t, she has to
gure out if the problem is with the intention or the execution, make
helpful suggestions, and then let you try again. She keeps this up until
she’s satised with your performance. e important principle is that she
never direct her judgments at you as a person. Instead she has to stay
focused on your actions, to keep looking for better ways to raise them to
higher and higher standards.
At the same time, you’re learning from her how to judge your own
playing: thinking more carefully about your intention, listening more
carefully to your execution, developing higher standards for what works,
and learning to think outside of the box for ways to improve. Most
important of all, you’re learning to focus your judgment on your
performance—your actions—and not on yourself. is way, when there’s
less you invested in your habits, you’re more willing to recognize
unskillful habits and to drop them in favor of more skillful ones.
Of course, when you and your teacher are judging your improvement
on a particular piece, it’s part of a longer process of judging how well the

156
relationship is working. She has to judge, over time, if you’re beneting
from her guidance, and so do you. But again, neither of you is judging the
worth of the other person.
In the same way, when you’re evaluating a potential meditation
teacher, look for someone who will evaluate your actions as a work in
progress. And apply the same standard to him or her. Even teachers who
can read minds need to get to know you over time to sense what might
and might not work in your particular case. e best teachers are those
who say, “Try this. If it doesn’t work out, come back and let me know
what happened, so we can gure out what might work for you.” Beware
of teachers who tell you not to think about what you’re doing, or who try
to force you into a one-size-ts-all technique. e relationship should be
one of trying things out together.
So when judging a teacher, you’re not trying to take on the
superhuman role of evaluating another person’s essential worth. After all,
the only way we know anything about other people is through their
actions, so that’s as far as our judgments can fairly extend.
At the same time, though, because you’re judging whether you want to
internalize another person’s standards, it’s not unfair to pass judgment on
what that person is doing. It’s for your own protection. is is why you
should look for two qualities in a teacher: wisdom and integrity. To gauge
these qualities, though, takes time and sensitivity. You have to be willing
to spend time with the person and try to be really observant of how that
person acts, because you can’t judge people just by rst impressions.
Integrity is easy to talk about, and the appearance of wisdom is easy to
fake—especially if the teacher has psychic powers. It’s important to
remember that powers of that sort simply come from a concentrated
mind. ey’re no guarantee of wisdom and integrity. And if they’re
exercised without wisdom and integrity, you’re better oﬀ staying away.
So your search has to ignore ashy qualities and focus on qualities
that are more plain and down-to-earth. To save time and needless pain in

157
the search, there are four early warning signs indicating that potential
teachers don’t have the wisdom or integrity to merit your trust.
e warning signs for untrustworthy wisdom are two. e rst is
when people show no gratitude for the help they’ve received—and this
applies especially to help from their parents and teachers. If they
deprecate their teachers, you have to wonder if they have anything of
value to pass on to you. People with no gratitude don’t appreciate
goodness, don’t value the eﬀort that goes into being helpful, and so will
probably not put out that eﬀort themselves.
e second warning sign is that they don’t hold to the principle of
karma. ey either deny that we have freedom of choice, or else teach
that one person can clear away another person’s bad karma from the past.
People of this sort are unlikely to put forth the eﬀort to be genuinely
skillful, and so are untrustworthy guides.
Lack of integrity also has two warning signs. e rst is when people
feel no shame in telling a deliberate lie. e second is when they don’t
conduct arguments in a fair and aboveboard manner: misrepresenting their
opponents, pouncing on the other side’s minor lapses, not acknowledging
the valid points the other side has made. People of this sort aren’t even
worth talking to, much less taking on as teachers.
As for people who don’t display these early warning signs, there are
some questions you can ask yourself about their behavior to gauge the
level of wisdom and integrity in their actions over time.
One question is whether a teacher’s actions betray any of the greed,
anger, or delusion that would inspire him to claim knowledge of
something he didn’t know, or to tell another person to do something that
was not in that person’s best interests. To test for a teacher’s wisdom,
notice how he or she responds to questions about what’s skillful and
what’s not, and how well he or she handles adversity. To test for integrity,
look for virtue in day-to-day activities, and purity in the teacher’s dealings
with others. Does this person make excuses for breaking the precepts,
bringing the precepts down to his level of behavior rather than lifting his

158
behavior to theirs? Does he take unfair advantage of other people? If so,
you’d better nd another teacher.
is, however, is where another uncomfortable truth comes in: You
can’t be a fair judge of another person’s integrity until you’ve developed
some of your own. is is probably the most uncomfortable truth of all,
for it requires that you accept responsibility for your judgments. If you
want to test other people’s potential for good guidance, you have to pass a
few tests yourself. Again, it’s like listening to a pianist. e better you are
as a pianist, the better your ability to judge the other person’s playing.
Fortunately, there are guidelines for developing integrity, and they
don’t require that you start out innately good. All they require is a
measure of truthfulness and maturity: the realization that your actions
make all the diﬀerence in your life, so you have to take care in how you
act, looking carefully at your motivation for acting and at the actual
results that come when you act. Before you act in thought, word, or deed,
look at the results you expect from your action. If it’s going to harm you
or anyone else, don’t do it. If you don’t foresee any harm, go ahead and
act. While you’re acting, check to see if you’re causing any unforeseen
harm. If you are, stop. If not, continue until you’re done. After you’re
done, look at the long-term results of your action. If it caused any harm,
talk it over with someone else on the path, develop a healthy sense of
shame around the mistake, and resolve not to repeat it. If it caused no
harm, take joy in the fact and keep on training.
As you train yourself in this way, you get more sensitive to what is and
isn’t skillful, because you’re more sensitive to the connections between
actions and their results. is helps you become a better judge of a
potential teacher in two ways, both in judging the teacher’s actions and in
evaluating the advice the teacher gives you.
For the only way really to evaluate that advice is to see what results it
gives when put into action: your own actions. If acting in that way fosters
within you such admirable qualities as being dispassionate, modest,
content, energetic, and unburdensome, the advice to act that way is the

159
genuine thing. e person who gives you that advice has passed at least
that test for being a genuine friend. And you’re learning still more about
how to judge for yourself.
Some people might object that it’s selsh and inhumane to keep
testing people to see if they t the bill, but remember: In testing a teacher
you’re also testing yourself. As you assimilate the qualities of an
admirable teacher, you become the sort of person who can oﬀer
admirable help to others. Again, it’s like practicing under a good piano
teacher. As you improve as a pianist, you’re not the only one who can
enjoy your playing. e better you get, the more joy you bring to others.
e better you understand the process of playing, the more eﬀectively
you can teach anyone who sincerely wants to learn from you. is is how
teaching lineages of high caliber get established for the benet of the
world.
So when you nd an admirable meditation teacher, you’re tapping into
a long lineage of admirable teachers, stretching back to the Buddha, and
helping it to extend into the future. Joining this lineage may require
accepting some uncomfortable truths, such as the need to learn from
criticism and to take responsibility for your actions. But if you’re up for
the challenge, you learn to take this human power of judgment—which,
when untrained, can so easily cause harm—and train it for the greater
good.
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
On the need for advice in the practice: “Lost in Quotation” in Beyond
All Directions
On the most important external factor in reaching awakening:
“Admirable Friendship” in Meditations
On wise vs. unwise ways of using your powers of judgment, see
“Judicious vs. Judgmental” in Meditations
On the teacher-student relationship: “ink like a ief” in Head &
Heart Together

160
Passages from the Pali Canon discussing what to look for in a teacher
are included in the study guide, Into the Stream.
On the values of the practice: “e Customs of the Noble Ones”
On non-Buddhist values that have shaped the way Dhamma is often
taught in the West: “e Roots of Buddhist Romanticism” in Purity of
Heart
RECORDINGS OF RELEVANT TALKS AND (TRANSCRIPTS):
2009/7/30: Admirable Friendship   (read)
2011/5/14: To Purify the Heart   (read)
2011/4/5: Remembering Ajaan Suwat   (read)
2011/1/25: Multi-dimensional Dhamma   (read)
2007/7/21: Factors for Stream Entry   (read)
2008/10/21: e Brightness of the World   (read)
2007/3/20: A Refuge from Modern Values   (read)

161
A P P E N D I X
Supplementary Meditations
As I noted in Part One, there are times when you need to get the mind
in the right mood before it will be willing to settle down with the breath.
Here are a few contemplations that can help create that mood.
e explanations here are simply suggestions for how to get started
with these contemplations, for these exercises are most eﬀective when
you use your ingenuity to tailor them to deal with the particulars of your
own moods. You can make any variations you want, as long as they help
move your thinking in the right direction: toward a desire to settle down
with the breath. When that desire arises, you can drop the contemplation
and focus right on your breathing.
In the beginning, you may nd that you need to engage for a fairly
long time in these contemplations before they have an eﬀect. Eventually,
though, you should gain a sense of what works for you. Use that
knowledge to make your contemplation more eﬃcient. In other words, go
right for the jugular of the mind state that’s getting in the way of your
settling down. at way you’ll have more time to work and play with the
breath.
When you’re feeling discouraged, try reecting on your own
generosity. ink of times in the past when you gave someone a gift, not
because you had to or because it was expected of you, but because you
simply wanted to. You had something that you would have liked to use
yourself, but then you decided you’d rather share it. Gifts of this sort are
good to remember because they remind you that you do have at least
some goodness to yourself. ey also remind you that you’re not always a
slave to your appetites. You have some freedom in how you act, and some
experience in how good it feels to exercise that freedom in a skillful way.

162
e word “gift” here doesn’t mean only a material gift. It can also mean
a gift of your time, your energy, your knowledge, or your forgiveness.
To get the most out of this contemplation, make a habit of looking for
opportunities in your daily life to be generous in any of these ways. at
way you always have fresh material for your contemplation. Without
fresh material, the contemplation can quickly grow stale.
In a similar way, you can reect on your own virtue. ink of times
when you could have gotten away with harming someone else, but you
didn’t do it. On principle. You saw that it was beneath you or would have
led to regret down the line. If you’ve taken the precepts, reect on the
times when you were tempted to break any of them, but you managed
not to. ink of how glad you are, in retrospect, that you didn’t. is sort
of reection not only helps the mind settle down in concentration, but
also helps you resist any temptations to break a precept the next time
they come around.
When you’re feeling lustful, contemplate what’s inside your body, and
remember that the same things are in the person for whose body you’re
feeling lust. Remember that lust can grow only when you block out huge
areas of reality—such as all the contents of the body—so broaden the
range of your inner gaze.
To get some beginning practice with this contemplation, try
visualizing the bones in your body. Start with the bones of the ngers. As
you visualize them, ask where you feel your ngers are right now. If
there’s any tension in the ngers, remember that there’s no tension in the
bones, so relax the tension. en move up to the bones in the palm of
your hand, and repeat the same exercise: Notice the tension around the
bones and relax it. Keep moving up the arms, repeating the same exercise,
until you reach the shoulders. When you’ve contemplated the shoulder
joints, move your inner gaze down to your feet. As you visualize the
bones in your feet, relax any tension you feel in the feet. en move up
the legs, through the pelvis, up the spine, through the neck, and nally to
the skull.

163
As a variation on this exercise, once you’ve nished relaxing a part of
the body around a particular bone, visualize it being lopped oﬀ as you
move to the next part. Keep this up until every part of the body feels
lopped away, and you’re sitting with a sense of spacious, light awareness.
You can apply the same exercise to any other organ of the body that
you nd especially incongruous with your lust. If, for instance, you nd
yourself attracted to skin, imagine your skin removed from your body
and placed in a pile on the oor.
To aid in your visualization, you can memorize the traditional list of
body parts used in this sort of contemplation:
head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin;
muscle, tendons, bones, bone marrow;
kidneys, heart, liver, membranes, spleen, lungs;
large intestines, small intestines, contents of the stomach, feces;
bile, phlegm, lymph, blood, sweat, fat, tears;
oil, saliva, mucus, uid in the joints, urine.
If you want, you can add other parts—such as the eyes or the brain—
that for some reason didn’t make it into the traditional list. Once you’ve
memorized the list, visualize the parts one by one, asking yourself—with
each part—where that part is in your felt sense of the body. To help with
your visualization, you can look at an anatomical chart, but remember
that none of the parts in your body are cleanly separate and dened as
they would be in such a chart. ey’re mixed with all the uids in the
body. If visualizing a particular part has a particularly strong eﬀect in
counteracting lust, you can focus your primary attention on that part
and, for the time being, put the rest of the list aside.
(For further ideas on dealing with lust, look at the discussion of
Disruptive Emotions in Part Two.)
Ideally, this contemplation should give rise to an inner sense of
lightness as you lose interest in the lust. If, however, you nd it giving rise
to fear or unsettling emotions, drop it and return to the breath.

164
When you’re feeling angry, look at the instructions for dealing with
anger in Part Two. You can also try the instructions for developing the
brahmaviharas, in Part One.
When you’re feeling lazy, contemplate the fact that death could come
at any time. Ask yourself: Are you ready to go in the next minute or two?
What would you need to do to put your mind in a state where it wouldn’t
be afraid to die? How would you feel if you died tonight after wasting the
opportunity to meditate and develop good strong qualities in the mind?
Keep asking yourself questions along these lines until you feel a desire to
meditate. en go straight to the breath.
is contemplation, like the contemplation of the body, is meant to
strengthen the mind in skillful resolves. If, however, you nd that it gives
rise to fear or unsettling emotions, drop it and go straight to the breath.
Another antidote to laziness is to think of times in the past when you
wished you could nd a moment of peace and quiet. ink of how
desperate you felt at those times. Now you’ve got the opportunity to nd
that peace and quiet. Do you want to throw it away?
ADDITIONAL READINGS:
For some helpful texts on these contemplations, see the study guide,
e Ten Recollections, also available under the title, A Meditator’s Tools.

165
Acknowledgements
For years, a handful of people—in particular, Mary Talbot, Jane
Yudelman, Bok Lim Kim, and Larry Rosenberg—have been asking me,
“When are you going to do a guide on breath meditation?” I kept telling
them that Ajaan Lee’s Keeping the Breath in Mind is already an excellent
guide to the practice, but they kept insisting in return that there’s a need
for a book written specically for a reader without a background in the
ai Wilderness Tradition. eir gentle but persistent pressure is what
has brought this book into being. Now that the book is a reality, I want
to thank them, for I’ve learned a lot in trying to gather my thoughts on
the topic into a concise, accessible form.
e book has benetted from their comments on it, as well as from
comments by Ajahn Nyanadhammo, Michael Barber, Matthew Grad,
Ruby Grad, Katharine Greider, Addie Onsanit, Nathanial Osgood, Dale
Schulz, Joe itathan, Donna Todd, Josephine Wolf, Barbara Wright,
and the monks here at the monastery. I would like to thank them for
their help. Any errors in the book, of course, are my own.
December, 2012

166
Table of Contents
Titlepage
1
Copyright
2
Introduction
3
Meditation: What & Why
3
What's in this Book
5
How to Read this Book
7
Basic Premises
8
Additional readings
27
Relevant talks
28
Basic Instructions
29
I : Getting Ready to Meditate
29
Your Physical Situation
29
Your Posture
31
The State of Your Mind
35
II : Focusing on the Breath
39
III : Leaving Meditation
48
IV : Meditating in Other Postures
49
Walking Meditation
49
Standing Meditation
54
Meditation Lying Down
55
V : Becoming a Meditator
56
Additional readings
58
Relevant talks
59
Common Problems
61
Pain
61
Wandering Thoughts
65
Drowsiness
70

167
Delusion Concentration
71
External Noises
72
Troubles with the Breath Itself
72
Unusual Energies & Sensations
76
Judging Your Progress
80
Maintaining Motivation
83
Disruptive Emotions
86
Visions & Other Uncanny Phenomena
95
Getting Stuck on Concentration
97
Random Insights
98
Additional readings
99
Relevant talks
99
Meditation in Daily Life
101
I : Your Inner Focus
103
II : Your Activities
105
Moderation in Conversation
107
Precepts
108
Restraint of the Senses
113
III : Your Surroundings
115
Admirable Friends
116
Frugality
118
Seclusion
119
Additional readings
123
Relevant talks
123
Advanced Practice
125
Jhana
125
Insight
139
Release
147
Additional readings
149
Relevant talks
150

168
Finding a Teacher
153
Additional readings
159
Relevant talks
160
Supplementary Meditations
161
Additional readings
164
Acknowledgements
165

